   R. P. Feynman, Rev. of Mod. Phys., 20, 367                                   1948




      Space-Time Approach to Non-Relativistic
               Quantum Mechanics


                                R.P. Feynman
                              Cornell University,
                              Ithaca, New York


                        —— ♦ ——
Reprinted in “Quantum Electrodynamics”, edited by Julian Schwinger
                        —— ♦ ——


                                     Abstract
         Non-relativistic quantum mechanics is formulated here in a dif-
     ferent way. It is, however, mathematically equivalent to the familiar
     formulation. In quantum mechanics the probability of an event which
     can happen in several dierent ways is the absolute square of a sum of
     complex contributions, one from each alternative way. The probability
     that a particle will be found to have a path x(t) lying somewhere within
     a region of space time is the square of a sum of contributions, one from
     each path in the region. The contribution from a single path is pos-
     tulated to be an exponential whose (imaginary) phase is the classical
     action (in units of ℏ) for the path in question. The total contribution
     from all paths reaching x, t from the past is the wave function ψ(x, t).
     This is shown to satisfy Schroedinger’s equation. The relation to ma-
     trix and operator algebra is discussed. Applications are indicated, in
     particular to eliminate the coordinates of the eld oscillators from the
     equations of quantum electrodynamics.


1. Introduction
  It is a curious historical fact that modern quantum mechanics began with
two quite dierent mathematical formulations: the dierential equation of

                                        1
Schroedinger, and the matrix algebra of Heisenberg. The two, apparently
dissimilar approaches, were proved to be mathematically equivalent. These
two points of view were destined to complement one another and to be
ultimately synthesized in Dirac’s transformation theory.
    This paper will describe what is essentially a third formulation of non-
relativistic quantum theory. This formulation was suggested by some of
Dirac’s1 ,2 remarks concerning the relation of classical action3 to quantum
mechanics. A probability amplitude is associated with an entire motion of
a particle as a function of time, rather than simply with a position of the
particle at a particular time.
    The formulation is mathematically equivalent to the more usual formu-
lations. There are, therefore, no fundamentally new results. However, there
is a pleasure in recognizing old things from a new point of view. Also, there
are problems for which the new point of view oers a distinct advantage.
For example, if two systems A and B, interact, the coordinates of one of the
systems, say B, may be eliminated from the equations describing the motion
of A. The interaction with B is represented by a change in the formula for
the probability amplitude associated with a motion of A. It is analogous
to the classical situation in which the eect of B, can be represented by a
change in the equations of motion of A (by the introduction of terms repre-
senting forces acting on A). In this way the coordinates of the transverse,
as well as of the longitudinal eld oscillators, may be eliminated from the
equations of quantum electrodynamics.
    In addition, there is always the hope that the new point of view will
inspire an idea for the modication of present theories, a modication nec-
essary to encompass present experiments.
    We rst discuss the general concept of the superposition of probability
amplitudes in quantum mechanics. We then show how this concept can
be directly extended to dene a probability amplitude for any motion or
path (position vs. time) in space-time. The ordinary quantum mechanics
is shown to result from the postulate that this probability amplitude has a
phase proportional to the action, computed classically, for this path. This is
true when the action is the time integral of a quadratic function of velocity.
The relation to matrix and operator algebra is discussed in a way that
   1
     P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (The Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1935), second edition, Section 33; also, Physik. Zeits. Sowjetunion 3, 64 (1933).
   2
      P. A. M. Dirac, Rev. Mod. Phys. 17, 195 (1945).
   3
     Throughout this paper the term “action” will be used for the time integral of the
Lagrangian along a path. When this path is the one actually taken by a particle, moving
classically, the integral should more properly be called Hamilton’s rst principle function.



                                             2
stays as close to the language of the new formulation as possible. There
is no practical advantage to this, but the formulae are very suggestive if a
generalization to a wider class of action functionals is contemplated. Finally,
we discuss applications of the formulation. As a particular illustration, we
show how the coordinates of a harmonic oscillator may be eliminated from
the equations of motion of a system with which it interacts. This can be
extended directly for application to quantum electrodynamics. A formal
extension which includes the eects of spin and relativity is described.


2. The Superposition of Probability Amplitudes
   The formulation to be presented contains as its essential idea the concept
of a probability amplitude associated with a completely specied motion as a
function of time. It is, therefore, worthwhile to review in detail the quantum-
mechanical concept of the superposition of probability amplitudes. We shall
examine the essential changes in physical outlook required by the transition
from classical to quantum physics.
    For this purpose, consider an imaginary experiment in which we can
make three measurements successive in time: rst of a quantity A, then
of B, and then of C. There is really no need for these to be of dierent
quantities, and it will do just as well if the example of three successive
position measurements is kept in mind. Suppose that a is one of a number
of possible results which could come from measurement A, b is a result that
could arise from B, and c is a result possible from the third measurement
C.4 We shall assume that the measurements A, B, and C are the type of
measurements that completely specify a state in the quantum-mechanical
case. That is, for example, the state for which B has the value b is not
degenerate.
    It is well known that quantum mechanics deals with probabilities, but
naturally this is not the whole picture. In order to exhibit, even more clearly,
the relationship between classical and quantum theory, we could suppose
that classically we are also dealing with probabilities but that all probabili-
ties either are zero or one. A better alternative is to imagine in the classical
case that the probabilities are in the sense of classical statistical mechanics
(where, possibly, internal coordinates are not completely specied).
    We dene Pab as the probability that if measurement A gave the result a,
   4
    For our discussion it is not important that certain values of a, b, or c might be excluded
by quantum mechanics but not by classical mechanics. For simplicity, assume the values
are the same for both but that the probability of certain values may be zero.



                                              3
then measurement B will give the result b. Similarly, Pbc is the probability
that if measurement B gives the result b, then measurement C gives c.
Further, let Pac be the chance that if A gives a, then C gives c. Finally,
denote by Pabc the probability of all three, i.e., if A gives a, then B gives
b, and C gives c. If the events between a and b are independent of those
between b and c, then
                              Pabc = Pab Pbc .                            (1)
This is true according to quantum mechanics when the statement that B is
b is a complete specication of the state.
    In any event, we expect the relation
                                      ∑
                               Pac =     Pabc .                      (2)
                                               b

This is because, if initially measurement A gives a and the system is later
found to give the result c to measurement C quantity B must have had some
value at the time intermediate to A and C. The probability that it was b is
Pabc . We sum, or  integrate, over all the mutually exclusive alternatives for
b (symbolized by b ).
     Now, the essential dierence between classical and quantum physics lies
in Eq. (2). In classical mechanics it is always true. In quantum mechanics
it is often false. We shall denote the quantum-mechanical probability that a
measurement of C results in c when it follows a measurement of A giving a
       q
by Pac   . Equation (2) is replaced in quantum mechanics by this remarkable
     5
law: There exist complex numbers ϕab , ϕbc , ϕac such that

               Pab = |ϕab |2 ,   Pbc = |ϕbc |2 ,        and     q
                                                               Pac = |ϕac |2 .      (3)

The classical law, obtained by combining (1) and (2),
                                   ∑
                             Pac =     Pab Pbc                                      (4)
                                           b

is replaced by                           ∑
                                 ϕac =             ϕab ϕbc .                        (5)
                                           b
If (5) is correct, ordinarily (4) is incorrect. The logical error made in deduc-
ing (4) consisted, of course, in assuming that to get from a to c the system
   5
     We have assumed b is a non-degenerate state, and that therefore (1) is true. Pre-
sumably, if in some generalization of quantum mechanics (1) were not true, even for pure
states b, (2) could be expected to be replaced by: There
                                                      ∑ are complex numbers ϕabc such
that Pabc = |ϕabc |2 . The analog of (5) is then ϕac = b ϕabc


                                           4
had to go through a condition such that B had to have some denite value,
b.
    If an attempt is made to verify this, i.e., if B is measured between the
experiments A and C, then formula (4) is, in fact, correct. More precisely, if
the apparatus to measure B is set up and used, but no attempt is made to
utilize the results of the B measurement in the sense that only the A to C
correlation is recorded and studied, then (4) is correct. This is because the
B measuring machine has done its job; if we wish, we could read the meters
at any time without disturbing the situation any further. The experiments
which gave a and c can, therefore, be separated into groups depending on
the value of b.
    Looking at probability from a frequency point of view (4) simply results
from the statement that in each experiment giving a and c, B had some
value. The only way (4) could be wrong is the statement, “B had some
value,” must sometimes be meaningless. Noting that (5) replaces (4) only
under the circumstance that we make no attempt to measure B, we are
led to say that the statement, “B had some value,” may be meaningless
whenever we make no attempt to measure B 6 .
    Hence, we have dierent results for the correlation of a and c, namely,
Eq. (4) or Eq. (5), depending upon whether we do or do not attempt to
measure B. No matter how subtly one tries, the attempt to measure B
must disturb the system, at least enough to change the results from those
given by (5) to those of (4)7 . That measurements do, in fact, cause the
necessary disturbances, and that, essentially, (4) could be false was rst
clearly enunciated by Heisenberg in his uncertainty principle. The law (5)
is a result of the work of Schroedinger, the statistical interpretation of Born
and Jordan, and the transformation theory of Dirac.8
    Equation (5) is a typical representation of the wave nature of matter.
   6
     It does not help to point out that we could have measured B had we wished. The
fact is that we did not.
   7
     How (4) actually results from (5) when measurements disturb the system has been
studied particularly by J. von Neumann (Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmahanik
(Dover Publications, New York, 1943)). The eect of perturbation of the measuring
equipment is eectively ∑ to change the phase of the interfering components, by θb , say, so
that (5) becomes ϕac = b eiθb ϕab ϕbc . However, as von Neumann shows, the phase shifts
must remain unknown if B is measured so that the resulting probability Pac is the square
of ϕac . averaged over all phases, θb . This results in (4).
   8
     If A and B are the operators corresponding to measurements ∫A and B, and if ψa ,
and ψb are solutions of Aψa = aψa , and Bχb = bχb , then ϕab = χ∗b ψa dx = (χ∗b , ψa ).
Thus, ψab is an element (a|b) of the transformation matrix for the transformation from a
representation in which A is diagonal to one in which B is diagonal.



                                             5
Here, the chance of nding a particle going from a to c through several
dierent routes (values of b) may, if no attempt is made to determine the
route, be represented as the square of a sum of several complex quantities-
one for each available route.
    Probability can show the typical phenomena of interference, usually as-
sociated with waves, whose intensity is given by the square of the sum of
contributions from dierent sources. The electron acts as a wave, (5), so to
speak, as long as no attempt is made to verify that it is a particle; yet one
can determine, if one wishes, by what route it travels just as though it were
a particle; but when one does that, (4) applies and it does act like a particle.
    These things are, of course, well known. They have already been ex-
plained many times.9 However, it seems worth while to emphasize the fact
that they are all simply direct consequences of Eq. (5), for it is essentially
Eq. (5) that is fundamental in my formulation of quantum mechanics.
    The generalization of Eqs. (4) and (5) to a large number of measure-
ments, say A, B, C, D, . . . , K, is, of course, that the probability of the se-
quence a, b, c, d . . . , k, is
                              Pabcd...k = |ϕabcd...k |2 .
The probability of the result a, c, k, for example, if b, d, . . . are measured, is
the classical formula:
                                 ∑∑
                         Pack =            . . . Pabcd...k ,                   (6)
                                     b    d

while the probability of the same sequence a, c, k if no measurements are
made between A and C and between C and K is
                         q
                               ∑∑
                       Pack =|        . . . ϕabcd...k |2 .            (7)
                                     b    d

The quantity ϕabcd...k we can call the probability amplitude for the condition
A = a, B = b, C = c, D = d, . . . , K = k. (It is, of course, expressible as a
product ϕab ϕbc ϕcd . . . ϕjk .)


3. The Probability Amplitude for a Space-Time
Path
   The physical ideas of the last section may be readily extended to de-
ne a probability amplitude for a particular completely specied space-time
  9
   See, for example, W. Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1930). particularly Chapter IV.


                                          6
path. To explain how this may be done, we shall limit ourselves to a one-
dimensional problem, as the generalization to several dimensions is obvious.
     Assume that we have a particle which can take up various values of
a coordinate x. Imagine that we make an enormous number of successive
position measurements, let us say separated by a small time interval . Then
a succession of measurements such as A, B, C, . . . might be the succession
of measurements of the coordinate x at successive times t1 , t2 , t3 , . . . , where
ti+1 = ti + . Let the value, which might result from measurement of the
coordinate at time ti be xi . Thus, if A is a measurement of x at t1 then
x1 is what we previously denoted by a. From a classical point of view, the
successive values, x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . of the coordinate practically dene a path
x(t). Eventually, we expect to go the limit  → 0.
     The probability of such a path is a function of x1 , x2 , . . . xi , . . ., say
P (. . . xi , xi+1 , . . .). The probability that the path lies in a particular region
R of space-time is obtained classically by integrating P over that region.
Thus, the probability that xi , lies between ai and bi and xi+1 lies between
ai+1 and etc., is
                  ∫bi b∫i+1
            ...               . . . P (. . . xi , xi+1 , . . .) . . . dx, dxi+1 . . . =
                  ai ai+1
                                  ∫
                              =       P (. . . xi , xi+1 , . . .) . . . dx, dxi+1 . . . ,   (8)
                                  R
             
the symbol R meaning that the integration is to be taken over those ranges
of the variables which lie within the region R. This is simply Eq. (6) with
a, b, . . . replaced by x1 , x2 , . . . and integration replacing summation.
     In quantum mechanics this is the correct formula for the case that
x1 , x2 , . . . , xi , . . . were actually all measured, and then only those paths ly-
ing within R were taken. We would expect the result to be dierent if no
such detailed measurements had been performed. Suppose a measurement
is made which is capable only of determining that the path lies somewhere
within R.
     The measurement is to be what we might call an “ideal measurement.”
We suppose that no further details could be obtained from the same mea-
surement without further disturbance to the system. I have not been able to
nd a precise denition. We are trying to avoid the extra uncertainties that
must be averaged over if, for example, more information were measured but
not utilized. We wish to use Eq. (5) or (7) for all xi and have no residual
part to sum over in the manner of Eq. (4).

                                                      7
    We expect that the probability that the particle is found by our “ideal
measurement” to be, indeed, in the region R is the square of a complex
number |ϕ(R)|2 . The number ϕ(R), which we may call the probability am-
plitude for region R is given by Eq. (7) with a, b, . . . replaced by xi , xi+1 , . . .
and summation replaced by integration:
                           ∫
             ϕ(R) = Lim      ×Φ(. . . xi , xi+1 . . .) . . . dxi dxi+1 . . . .   (9)
                        →0    R

The complex number Φ(. . . xi , xi+1 . . .) is a function of the variables xi ,
dening the path. Actually, we imagine that the time spacing e approaches
zero so that Φ essentially depends on the entire path x(t) rather than only
on just the values of xi , at the particular times ti , xi = x(ti ). We might call
Φ the probability amplitude functional of paths x(t).
    We may summarize these ideas in our rst postulate:
    I. If an ideal measurement is performed, to determine whether a particle
has a path lying in a region of space-time, then the probability that the result
will be armative is the absolute square of a sum of complex contributions,
one from each path in the region.
    The statement of the postulate is incomplete. The meaning of a sum of
terms one for “each” path is ambiguous. The precise meaning given in Eq.
(9) is this: A path is rst dened only by the positions xi ; through which it
goes at a sequence of equally spaced times, 10 ti = ti−1 + . Then all values
of the coordinates within R have an equal weight. The actual magnitude of
the weight depends upon  and can be so chosen that the probability of an
event which is certain shall be normalized to unity. It may not be best to do
so, but we have left this weight factor in a proportionality constant in the
second postulate. The limit  → 0 must be taken at the end of a calculation.
    When the system has several degrees of freedom the coordinate space x
has several dimensions so that the symbol x will represent a set of coordi-
nates (x(1) , x(2) , . . . x(k) ) for a system with k degrees of freedom. A path is
a sequence of congurations for successive times and is described by giving
                                    (1) (2)      (k)
the conguration xi , or (xi , xi , . . . , xi ), i.e., the value of each of the k
coordinates for each time ti . The symbol dxi , will be understood to mean
  10
     There are very interesting mathematical problems involved in the attempt to avoid the
subdivision and limiting processes. Some sort of complex measure is being associated with
the space of functions x(t). Finite results can be obtained under unexpected circumstances
because the measure is not positive everywhere, but the contributions from most of the
paths largely cancel out. These curious mathematical problems are sidestepped by the
subdivision process. However, one feels as Cavalieri must have felt calculating the volume
of a pyramid before the invention of calculus.


                                            8
the volume element in k dimensional conguration space (at time ti ). The
statement of the postulates is independent of the coordinate system which
is used.
    The postulate is limited to dening the results of position measurements.
It does not say what must be done to dene the result of a momentum
measurement, for example. This is not a real limitation, however, because
in principle the measurement of momentum of one particle can be performed
in terms of position measurements of other particles, e.g., meter indicators.
Thus, an analysis of such an experiment will determine what it is about the
rst particle which determines its momentum.


4. The Calculation of the Probability Amplitude
for a Path
  The rst postulate prescribes the type of mathematical framework required
by quantum mechanics for the calculation of probabilities. The second pos-
tulate gives a particular content to this framework by prescribing how to
compute the important quantity Φ for each path:
    II. The paths contribute equally in magnitude. but the phase of their
contribution is the classical action (in units of ℏ); i.e., the time integral of
the Lagrangian taken along the path.
    That is to say, the contribution Φ[x(t)] from a given path x(t) is pro-
portional to exp(i/ℏS[x(t)], where the action S[x(t)] = L(ẋ(t), x(t)dt is
the time integral of the classical Lagrangian L(ẋ, x) taken along the path in
question. The Lagrangian, which may be an explicit function of the time,
is a function of position and velocity. If we suppose it to be a quadratic
function of the velocities, we can show the mathematical equivalence of the
postulates here and the more usual formulation of quantum mechanics.
    To interpret the rst postulate it was necessary to dene a path by
giving only the succession of points xi , through which the path passes at
successive times ti . To compute S = L(ẋ, x)dt we need to know the path
at all points, not just at xi We shall assume that the function x(t) in the
interval between ti and ti+1 is the path followed by a classical particle, with
the Lagrangian L, which starting from xi , at ti reaches xi+1 at ti+1 . This
assumption is required to interpret the second postulate for discontinuous
paths. The quantity Φ(. . . xi , xi+1 , . . .) can be normalized (for various ) if
desired, so that the probability of an event which is certain is normalized to
unity as  → 0.
    There is no diculty in carrying out the action integral because of the


                                        9
sudden changes of velocity encountered at the times ti as long as L does not
depend upon any higher time derivatives of the position than the rst. Fur-
thermore, unless L is restricted in this way the end points are not sucient
to dene the classical path. Since the classical path is the one which makes
the action a minimum, we can write
                                  ∑
                             S=       S(xi+1 , xi ),                    (10)
                                     i

where
                                         ti+1
                                         ∫
                    S(xi+1 , xi ) = Min.     L(ẋ(t), x(t))dt.                (11)
                                              ti

Written in this way, the only appeal to classical mechanics is to supply us
with a Lagrangian function. Indeed, one could consider postulate two as
simply saying, “Φ is the exponential of i times the integral of a real function
of x(t) and its rst time derivative.” Then the classical equations of motion
might be derived later as the limit for large dimensions. The function of x
and ẋ then could be shown to be the classical Lagrangian within a constant
factor.
    Actually, the sum in (10), even for nite  is innite and hence meaning-
less (because of the innite extent of time). This reects a further incom-
pleteness of the postulates. We shall have to restrict ourselves to a nite,
but arbitrarily long, time interval.
    Combining the two postulates and using Eq. (10). we nd
                                                   ]
                                 i∑                        dxi+1 dxi
                       ∫
         ϕ(R) = Lim       ×exp         S(xi+1 , xi ) · · ·           ··· , (12)
                  →0 R          ℏ                           A A
                                         i

where we have let the normalization factor be split into a factor 1/A (whose
exact value we shall presently determine) for each instant of time. The inte-
gration is just over those values xi , xi+1 , . . . which lie in the region R. This
equation, the denition (11) of S(xi+1 , xi ), and the physical interpretation
of |ϕ(R)|2 as the probability that the particle will be found in R, complete
our formulation of quantum mechanics.


5. Denition of the Wave Function
  We now proceed to show the equivalence of these postulates to the ordinary
formulation of quantum mechanics. This we do in two steps. We show in this

                                             10
section how the wave function may be dened from the new point of view.
In the next section we shall show that this function satises Schroedinger’s
dierential wave equation.
      We shall see that it is the possibility, (10), of expressing S as a sum, and
hence Φ as a product, of contributions from successive sections of the path,
which leads to the possibility of dening a quantity having the properties of
a wave function.
      To make this clear, let us imagine that we choose a particular time t and
divide the region R in Eq. (12) into pieces, future and past relative to t. We
imagine that R can be split into: (a) a region R′ , restricted in any way in
space, but lying entirely earlier in time than some t′ , such that t′ < t; (b) a
region R′′ arbitrarily restricted in space but lying entirely later in time than
t′′ , such that t′′ > t; (c) the region between t′ and t′′ in which all the values
of x coordinates are unrestricted, i.e., all of space-time between t′ and t′′ .
The region (c) is not absolutely necessary. It can be taken as narrow in time
as desired. However, it is convenient in letting us consider varying t a little
without having to redene R′ and R′′ . Then |ϕ(R′ , R′′ )|2 is the probability
that the path occupies R′ and R′′ . Because R′ is entirely previous to R′′ ,
considering the time t as the present, we can express this as the probability
that the path had been in region R′ and will be in region R′′ . If we divide by
a factor, the probability that the path is in R′ , to renormalize the probability
we nd: |ϕ(R′ , R′′ )|2 is the (relative) probability that if the system were in
region R′ it will be found later in R′′ .
      This is, of course, the important quantity in predicting the results of
many experiments. We prepare the system in a certain way (e.g., it was in
region R′ ) and then measure some other property (e.g., will it he found in
region R′′ ?). What does (12) say about computing this quantity, or rather
the quantity ϕ(R′ , R′′ ) of which it is the square?
      Let us suppose in Eq. (12) that the time t corresponds to one particular
point k of the subdivision of time into steps , i.e., assume t = tk , the index
k, of course, depending upon the subdivision . Then, the exponential being
the exponential of a sum may be split into a product of two factors
                     ∞                  ]       k−1                 ]
                      i∑                         i ∑
               exp          S(xi+1 , xi ) · exp          S(xi+1 , xi ) .      (13)
                     ℏ                           ℏ
                     i=k                        i=−∞

   The rst factor contains only coordinates with index k or higher, while
the second contains only coordinates with index k or lower. This split is
possible because of Eq. (10), which results essentially from the fact that
the Lagrangian is a function only of positions and velocities. First, the

                                       11
integration on all variables xi for i > k can be performed on the rst factor
resulting in a function of xk (times the second factor). Next, the integration
on all variables xi , for i < k can be performed on the second factor also,
giving a function of xk . Finally, the integration on xk can be performed.
That is, ϕ(R′ , R′′ ) can be written as the integral over xk of the product of
two factors. We will call these χ∗ (xk , t) and ψ(xk , t):
                                     ∫
                        ϕ(R , R ) = χ∗ (x, t)ψ(x, t)dx,
                            ′  ′′
                                                                          (14)

where
                                k−1
                                                 ]
                              i ∑                   dxk−1 dxk−2
                     ∫
      ψ(xk , t) = Lim    ×exp       S(xi+1 , xi )               ...,        (15)
                  →0 R′      ℏ                       A     A
                                  i=−∞

and
                                ∞
                                                ]
                               i∑                  1 dxk+1 dxk+2
                     ∫
       ∗
      χ (xk , t) = Lim     exp     S(xi+1 , xi ) ·               ....       (16)
                   →0 R′′     ℏ                   A A       A
                                  i=k

     The symbol R′ is placed on the integral for ψ to indicate that the coor-
dinates are integrated over the region R′ , and, for ti between t′ and t, over
all space. In like manner, the integral for χ∗ is over R′′ and over all space for
those coordinates corresponding to times between t and t′′ . The asterisk on
χ∗ denotes complex conjugate, as it will be found more convenient to dene
(16) as the complex conjugate of some quantity, χ.
     The quantity ψ depends only upon the region R′ previous to t, and is
completely denned if that region is known. It does not depend, in any way,
upon what will be done to the system after time t. This latter information
is contained in χ. Thus, with ψ and χ we have separated the past history
from the future experiences of the system. This permits us to speak of the
relation of past and future in the conventional manner. Thus, if a particle
has been in a region of space-time R′ it may at time t be said to be in a
certain condition, or state, determined only by its past and described by the
so-called wave function ψ(x, t). This function contains all that is needed to
predict future probabilities. For, suppose, in another situation, the region
R′ were dierent, say r′ , and possibly the Lagrangian for times before t were
also altered. But, nevertheless, suppose the quantity from Eq. (15) turned
out to be the same. Then, according to (14) the probability of ending in
any region R′′ is the same for R′ as for r′ . Therefore, future measurements
will not distinguish whether the system had occupied R′ or r′ . Thus, the

                                        12
wave function ψ(x, t) is sucient to dene those attributes which are left
from past history which determine future behavior.
    Likewise, the function χ(x, t) characterizes the experience, or, let us say,
experiment to which the system is to be subjected. If a dierent region, r′′
and dierent Lagrangian after t, were to give the same χ∗ (x, t) via Eq. (16),
as does region R′′ , then no matter what the preparation, ψ, Eq. (14) says
that the chance of nding the system in R′′ is always the same as nding it
in r′′ . The two “experiments” R′′ and r′′ are equivalent, as they yield the
same results. We shall say loosely that these experiments are to determine
with what probability the system is in state χ. Actually, this terminology
is poor. The system is really in state ψ. The reason we can associate a
state with an experiment is, of course, that for an ideal experiment there
turns out to be a unique state (whose wave function is χ(x, t)). for which
the experiment succeeds with certainty.
    Thus, we can say: the probability that a system in state ψ will be found
by an experiment whose characteristic state is χ (or, more loosely, the chance
that a system in state ψ will appear to be in χ) is
                           ∣∫                    ∣2
                           ∣                     ∣
                           ∣ χ∗ (x, t)ψ(x, t)dx∣ .                         (17)
                           ∣                     ∣
   These results agree, of course, with the principles of ordinary quantum
mechanics. They are a consequence of the fact that the Lagrangian is a
function of position, velocity, and time only.


6. The Wave Equation
   To complete the proof of the equivalence with the ordinary formulation
we shall have to show that the wave function dened in the previous section
by Eq. (15) actually satises the Schroedinger wave equation. Actually, we
shall only succeed in doing this when the Lagrangian L in (11) is a quadratic,
but perhaps inhomogeneous, form in the velocities ẋ(t). This is not a limita-
tion, however, as it includes all the cases for which the Schroedinger equation
has been veried by experiment.
    The wave equation describes the development of the wave function with
time. We may expect to approach it by noting that, for nite , Eq. (15)
permits a simple recursive relation to be developed. Consider the appearance
of Eq. (15) if we were to compute ψ at the next instant of time:
                                      k
                                                     ]
                                   i ∑                   dxk dxk−1
                       ∫
     ψ(xk+1 , t + ) =       exp         S(xi+1 , xi ) ×           ...    (15′ )
                         R ′       ℏ                      A    A
                                  i=−∞


                                      13
This is similar to (15) except for the integration over the additional variable
xk , and the extra term in the sum in the exponent. This term means that
the integral of (15’) is the same as the integral of (15) except for the factor
(1/A)exp(i/ℏ)S(xk+1 , xk ). Since this does not contain any of the variables
xi , for i less than k, all of the integrations on dx, up to dxk−1 can be
performed with this factor left out. However, the result of these integrations
is by (15) simply ψ(xk , t). Hence, we nd from (15’) the relation
                                                  
                                      i
                              ∫
             ψ(xk+1 , t + ) = exp S(xk+1 , xk ) ψ(xk , t)dxk /A.          (18)
                                      ℏ

This relation giving the development of ψ with time will be shown, for
simple examples, with suitable choice of A, to be equivalent to Schroedinger’s
equation. Actually, Eq. (18) is not exact, but is only true in the limit  → 0
and we shall derive the Schroedinger equation by assuming (18) is valid to
rst order in . The Eq. (18) need only be true for small  to the rst
order in . For if we consider the factors in (15) which carry us over a nite
interval of time, T , the number of factors is T /. If an error of order 2
is made in each, the resulting error will not accumulate beyond the order
2 (T /) or T , which vanishes in the limit.
     We shall illustrate the relation of (18) to Schroedinger’s equation by
applying it to the simple case of a particle moving in one dimension in a
potential V (x). Before we do this, however, we would like to discuss some
approximations to the value S(xi+1 , xi ) given in (11) which will be sucient
for expression (18).
     The expression dened in (11) for S(xi+1 , xi ) is dicult to calculate
exactly for arbitrary  from classical mechanics. Actually, it is only necessary
that an approximate expression for S(xi+1 , xi ) be used in (18), provided the
error of the approximation be of an order smaller than the rst in . We
limit ourselves to the case that the Lagrangian is a quadratic, but perhaps
inhomogeneous, form in the velocities ẋ(t). As we shall see later, the paths
which are important are those for which xi+1 − xi is of order 1/2 . Under
these circumstances, it is sucient to calculate the integral in (11) over the
classical path taken by a free particle.11 In Cartesian coordinates 12 the
path of a free particle is a straight line so the integral of (11) can be taken
  11
      It is assumed that the “forces” enter through a scalar and vector potential and not in
terms involving the square of the velocity. More generally, what is meant by a free particle
is one for which the Lagrangian is altered by omission of the terms linear in. and those
independent of, the velocities.
   12
      More generally, coordinates for which the terms quadratic in the velocity in L(ẋ, x)
appear with constant coecients.


                                            14
along a straight line. Under these circumstances it is suciently accurate
to replace the integral by the trapezoidal rule
                           (                 )    (                )
                            xi+1 − xi             xi+1 − xi
         S(xi+1 , xi ) = L             , xi+1 + L             , xi    (19)
                        2                      2       

or, if it proves more convenient,
                                      (                         )
                                          xi+1 − xi xi+1 + xi
                 S(xi+1 , xi ) = L                ,                .     (20)
                                                       2

These are not valid in a general coordinate system, e.g., spherical. An
even simpler approximation may be used if, in addition, there is no vector
potential or other terms linear in the velocity (see page 376):
                                       (                 )
                                         xi−1 − xi
                    S(xi+1 , xi ) = L             , xi+1 .           (21)
                                             

   Thus, for the simple example of a particle of mass m moving in one
dimension under a potential V (x), we can set
                                 (          )
                               m xi+1 − xi
               S(xi+1 , xi ) =                − V (xi+1 ).      (22)
                               2       

   For this example, then, Eq. (18) becomes
                                  { (
                                  i m xk+1 − xk 2
                           ∫                    )
          ψ(xk+1 , t + ) = exp                    −
                                   ℏ 2      
                                      −V (xk+1 )}] ψ(xk , t)dxk /A.       (23)

Let us call xk+1 = x and xk+1 − xk = ξ so that xk = x − ξ. Then (23)
becomes
                            imξ 2        −iV (x)              dξ
                       ∫
          ψ(x, t + ) = exp        · exp          · ψ(x − ξ, t) . (24)
                             · 2ℏ          ℏ                  A

    The integral
               ∗on ξ will converge if ψ(x, t) falls o suciently for large x
(certainly if ψ (x)ψ(x0dx = 1). In the integration on ξ, since  is very
small, the exponential of imξ 2 /2ℏ oscillates extremely rapidly except in the
region about ξ = 0 (ξ of order (ℏ/m)1/2 ). Since the function ψ(x − ξ, t) is
a relatively smooth function of ξ (since  may be taken as small as desired),
the region where the exponential oscillates rapidly will contribute very little


                                          15
because of the almost complete cancelation of positive and negative contri-
butions. Since only small ξ are eective, ψ(x − ξ, t) may be expanded as a
Taylor series. Hence,
                                                        (            )
                                                           −iV (x)
                                      ψ(x, t + ) = exp                ×
                                                               ℏ
              imξ 2                ∂ψ(x, t) ξ 2 ∂ 2 ψ(x, t)
     ∫      (       )                                             
   × exp               ψ(x, t) − ξ          +               − . . . dξ/A. (25)
               2ℏ                   ∂x        2    ∂x2

Now
                 ∞
                      exp(imξ 2 /2ℏ)dξ = (2πℏi/m)1/2 ,
                −∞

                 ∞
                      exp(imξ 2 /2ℏ)ξdξ = 0,                                         (26)
                −∞

                 ∞
                      exp(imξ 2 /2ℏ)ξ 2 dξ = (ℏi/m)(2πℏi/m)1/2 ,
                −∞

while the integral containing ξ 2 is zero, for like the one with ξ it possesses
an odd integrand, and the ones with ξ 4 are of at least the order  smaller
than the ones kept here.13 If we expand the left-hand side to rst order in
 (25) becomes

                                        −iV (x) (2πℏi/m)1/2
                                      (          )
                       ∂ψ(x, t)
           ψ(x, t) +           = exp
                         ∂t                 ℏ             A
                                                 2
                                                              
                                            ℏi ∂ ψ(x, t)
                                × ψ(x, t) +               + ... .                     (27)
                                             m     ∂x2

In order that both sides may agree to zero order in , we must set

                                  A = (2πℏi/m)1/2 .                                  (28)

Then expanding the exponential containing V (x), we get

                                                     ℏi ∂ 2 ψ
                        (            ) (                       )
                    ∂ψ        i
        ψ(x, t) +     = 1 − V (x) × ψ(x, t) +                   .                    (29)
                    ∂t        ℏ                      2m ∂x2
  13
     Really, these integrals are oscillatory and not dened, but they may be dened by
using a convergence factor. Such a factor is automatically provided by ψ(x − ξ, t) in (24).
If a more formal procedure is desired replace ℏ by ℏ(1 − iδ), for example, where δ is a
small positive number, and then let δ → 0.



                                            16
Canceling ψ(x, t) from both sides, and comparing terms to rst order in 
and multiplying by −ℏ/i one obtains
                                          (          )2
                          ℏ ∂ψ    1           ℏ ∂
                        −      =                          ψ + V (x)ψ,                  (30)
                          i ∂t   2ṁ          i ∂x

which is Schroedinger’s equation for the problem in question.
    The equation for χ∗ can be developed in the same way, but adding a
factor decreases the time by one step, i.e., χ∗ satises an equation like (30)
but with the sign of the time reversed. By taking complex conjugates we
can conclude that χ satises the same equation as ψ, i.e., an experiment can
be dened by the particular state χ to which it corresponds.14
    This example shows that most of the contribution to ψ(xk+1 , t+) comes
from values of xk in ψ(xk , t) which are quite close to xk+1 (distant of order
1/2 ) so that the integral equation (23) can, in the limit, be replaced by a
dierential equation. The “velocities,” (xk+1 − xk )/ which are important
are very high, being of order (ℏ/m)1/2 which diverges as  → 0. The paths
involved are, therefore, continuous but possess no derivative. They are of a
type familiar from study of Brownian motion.
    It is these large velocities which make it so necessary to be careful in
approximating S(xk+1 , xk ) from Eq. (11).15 To replace V (xk+1 ) by V (xk )
would, of course, change the exponent in (18) by i[V (xk )−V (xk+1 )]/ℏ which
is of order (xk+1 − xk ), and thus lead to unimportant terms of higher order
than  on the right-hand side of (29). It is for this reason that (20) and (21)
are equally satisfactory approximations to S(xi+1 , xi ) when there is no vector
potential. A term, linear in velocity, however, arising from a vector potential,
as Aẋdt must be handled more carefully. Here a term in S(xk+1 , xk ) such
as A(xk+1 ) × (xk+1 − xk ) diers from A(xk )(xk+1 − xk ) by a term of order
  14
      Dr. Hartland Snyder has pointed out to me. in private conversation, the very inter-
esting possibility chat there may be a generalization of quantum mechanics in which the
states measured by experiment cannot be prepared; that is, there would be no state into
which a system may be put for which a particular experiment gives certainty for a result.
The class of functions χ is not identical to the class of available states ψ. This would
result if, for example, χ satised a dierent equation than ψ.
   15
      Equation (18) is actually exact when (11) is used for S(xi+1 , xi ) for arbitrary  for
cases in which the potential does not involve x to higher powers than the second (e.g.,
free particle, harmonic oscillator). It is necessary, however, to use a more accurate value
of A. One can dene A in this way. Assume classical particles with k degrees of freedom
start from the point xi , ti , with uniform density in momentum space. Write the number of
particles having a given component of momentum in range dp as dp/p) , with p0 , constant.
Then A = (2πℏi/p0 )k/2 ρ−1/2 , where ρ is the density in k dimensional coordinate space
xi+1 of these particles at time ti+1 .


                                              17
(xk+1 − xk )2 , and, therefore, of order . Such a term would lead to a change
in the resulting wave equation. For this reason the approximation (21) is
not a suciently accurate approximation to (11) and one like (20), (or (19)
from which (20) diers by terms of order higher than ) must be used. If A
represents the vector potential and p = (ℏ/i), the momentum operator,
then (20) gives, in the Hamiltonian operator, a term (1/2m)(p−(e/cA)·(p−
e/c)A, while (21) gives (1/2m)(p · p−(2e/c)A · p+(e2 /c2 )A · A. These two
expressions dier by (ℏe/2imc)  ·A which may not be zero. The question
is still more important in the coecient of terms which are quadratic in
the velocities. In these terms (19) and (20) are not suciently accurate
representations of (11) in general. It is when the coecients are constant
that (19) or (20) can be substituted for (11). If an expression such as (19) is
used, say for spherical coordinates, when it is not a valid approximation to
(11), one obtains a Schroedinger equation in which the Hamiltonian operator
has some of the momentum operators and coordinates in the wrong order.
Equation (11) then resolves the ambiguity in the usual rule to replace p
and q by the non-commuting quantities (ℏ/i)(∂/∂q) and q in the classical
Hamiltonian H(p, q).
    It is clear that the statement (11) is independent of the coordinate sys-
tem. Therefore, to nd the dierential wave equation it gives in any coor-
dinate system, the easiest procedure is rst to nd the equations in Carte-
sian coordinates and then to transform the coordinate system to the one
desired. It suces, therefore, to show the relation of the postulates and
Schroedinger’s equation in rectangular coordinates.
    The derivation given here for one dimension can be extended directly
to the case of three-dimensional Cartesian coordinates for any number,
K, of particles interacting through potentials with one another, and in a
magnetic eld, described by a vector potential. The terms in the vec-
tor potential require completing the square in the exponent in the usual
way for Gaussian integrals. The variable x must be replaced by the set
x(1) to x(3K) where x(1) , x(2) , x(3) are the coordinates of the rst parti-
cle of mass m1 , x(4) , x(5) , x(6) of the second of mass m2 , etc. The symbol
dx is replaced by dx(1) dx(2) . . . dx(3K) , and the integration over dx is re-
placed by a 3K–fold integral. The constant A has, in this case, the valued
A = (2πℏi/m1 )1/2 (2πℏi/m2 )1/2 . . . (2πℏi/mK )1/2 . The Lagrangian is the
classical Lagrangian for the same problem, and the Schroedinger equation
resulting will be that which corresponds to the classical Hamiltonian, de-
rived from this Lagrangian. The equations in any other coordinate system
may be obtained by transformation. Since this includes all cases for which
Schroedinger’s equation has been checked with experiment, we may say our

                                      18
postulates are able to describe what can be described by non-relativistic
quantum mechanics, neglecting spin.


7. Discussion of the Wave Equation
             The Classical Limit

   This completes the demonstration of the equivalence of the new and old
formulations. We should like to include in this section a few remarks about
the important equation (18).
    This equation gives the development of the wave function during a small
time interval. It is easily interpreted physically as the expression of Huy-
gens’ principle for matter waves. In geometrical optics the rays in an inho-
mogeneous medium satisfy Fermat’s principle of least time. We may state
Huygens’ principle in wave optics in this way: If the amplitude of the wave is
known on a given surface, the amplitude at a near by point can be considered
as a sum of contributions from all points of the surface. Each contribution
is delayed in phase by an amount proportional to the time it would take
the light to get from the surface to the point along the ray of least time of
geometrical optics. We can consider (22) in an analogous manner starting
with Hamilton’s rst principle of least action for classical or “geometrical”
mechanics. If the amplitude of the wave ψ is known on a given “surface,” in
particular the “surface” consisting of all x at time t, its value at a particular
nearby point at time t + , is a sum of contributions from all points of the
surface at t. Each contribution is delayed in phase by an amount propor-
tional to the action it would require to get from the surface to the point
along the path of least action of classical mechanics. 16
    Actually Huygens’ principle is not correct in optics. It is replaced by Kir-
cho’s modication which requires that both the amplitude and its deriva-
tive must be known on the adjacent surface. This is a consequence of the
fact that the wave equation in optics is second order in the time. The wave
equation of quantum mechanics is rst order in the time; therefore, Huygens’
principle is correct for matter waves, action replacing time.
    The equation can also be compared mathematically to quantities appear-
ing in the usual formulations. In Schroedinger’s method the development of
the wave function with time is given by
                                       ℏ ∂ψ
                                   −        = Hψ,                                 (31)
                                       i ∂t
  16
    See in this connection the very interesting remarks of Schroedinger, Ann. d. Physik
79, 489 (1926).


                                          19
which has the solution (for any  if H is time independent)

                       ψ(x, t + ) = exp(−iH/ℏ)ψ(x, t).                        (32)

Therefore, Eq. (18) expresses the operator exp(−iH/ℏ) by an approximate
integral operator for small .
    From the point of view of Heisenberg one considers the position at time
t, for example, as an operator x. The position x′ at a later time t +  can
be expressed in terms of that at time t by the operator equation

                          x′ = exp(iH/ℏ)xexp − (iH/ℏ).                        (33)

The transformation theory of Dirac allows us to consider the wave function
at time t + , ψ(x′ , t + ), as representing a state in a representation in which
x′ is diagonal, while ψ(x, t) represents the same state in a representation in
which x is diagonal. They are, therefore, related through the transformation
function (x′ |x) , which relates these representations:
                                         ∫
                          ψ(x , t + ) = (x′ |x) ψ(x, t)dx.
                              ′



Therefore, the content of Eq. (18) is to show that for small  we can set

                          (x′ |x) = (1/A)exp(iS(x′ , x)/ℏ)                     (34)

with S(x′ , x) dened as in (11).
    The close analogy between (x′ , |x) and the quantity exp(iS(x′ , x)/ℏ)
has been pointed out on several occasions by Dirac.17 In fact, we now see
that to sucient approximations the two quantities may be taken to be
proportional to each other. Dirac’s remarks were the starting point of the
present development. The points he makes concerning the passage to the
classical limit ℏ → 0 are very beautiful, and I may perhaps be excused for
briey reviewing them here.
    First we note that the wave function at x′′ at time t′′ can be obtained
from that at x′ at time t′ by
                                                          ∫     ∫
                                         ′′ ′′
                                     ψ(x , t ) = Lim . . . ×
                                                      →0
                 j−1              ]
                  i∑                              dx0 dx1     dxj−1
          ×exp        S(xi+1 , xi ) × ψ(x′ , t′ )         ...       ,  (35)
                 ℏ                                 A A          A
                    i=0
  17
    P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (The Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1935), second edition, Section 33; also, Physik. Zeits. Sowjetunion 3, 64 (1933).


                                         20
where we put x0 ≡ x′′ and xj ≡ x′′ where i = t′′ − t′ (between the times
t′ and t′′ we assume no restriction is being puton the region of integration).
This can be seen either by repeated applications of (18) or directly from Eq.
(15). Now we ask, as ℏ → 0 what values of the intermediate coordinates
xi , contribute most strongly to the integral? These will be the values most
likely to be found by experiment and therefore will determine, in the limit,
the classical path. If ℏ is very small, the exponent will be a very rapidly
varying function of any of its variables xi . As xi , varies, the positive and
negative contributions of the exponent nearly cancel. The region at which
xi , contributes most strongly is that at which the phase of the exponent
varies least rapidly with xi (method of stationary phase). Call the sum in
the exponent S;
                                  j−1
                                  ∑
                             S=       S(xi+1 , xi ).                       (36)
                                     i=0
Then the classical orbit passes, approximately, through those points xi at
which the rate of change of S with xi , is small, or in the limit of small ℏ,
zero, i.e., the classical orbit passes through the points at which ∂S/∂xi for
all xi . Taking the limit  → 0, (36) becomes in view of (11)

                                ∫t′′
                           S=          L(ẋ(t), x(t))dt.                  (37)
                                t′

We see then that the classical path is that for which the integral (37) suers
no rst-order change on varying the path. This is Hamilton’s principle and
leads directly to the Lagrangian equations of motion.


8. Operator Algebra
       Matrix Elements

   Given the wave function and Schroedinger’s equation, of course all of
the machinery of operator or matrix algebra can be developed. It is, how-
ever, rather interesting to express these concepts in a somewhat dierent
language more closely related to that used in stating the postulates. Little
will be gained by this in elucidating operator algebra. In fact, the results
are simply a translation of simple operator equations into a somewhat more
cumbersome notation. On the other hand, the new notation and point of
view are very useful in certain applications described in the introduction.
Furthermore, the form of the equations permits natural extension to a wider

                                           21
class of operators than is usually considered (e.g., ones involving quantities
referring to two or more dierent times). If any generalization to a wider
class of action functionals is possible, the formulae to be developed will play
an important role.
      We discuss these points in the next three sections. This section is con-
cerned mainly with denitions. We shall dene a quantity which we call a
transition element between two states. It is essentially a matrix element.
But instead of being the matrix element between a state ψ and another
χ corresponding to the same time, these two states will refer to dierent
times. In the following section a fundamental relation between transition
elements will be developed from which the usual commutation rules between
coordinate and momentum may be deduced. The same relation also yields
Newton’s equation of motion in matrix form. Finally, in Section 10 we dis-
cuss the relation of the Hamiltonian to the operation of displacement in
time.
      We begin by dening a transition element in terms of the probability
of transition from one state to another. More precisely, suppose we have a
situation similar to that described in deriving (17). The region R consists
of a region R′ previous to t′ , all space between t′ and t′′ and the region R′′
after t′′ . We shall study the probability that a system in region R′ is later
found in region R′′ . This is given by (17). We shall discuss in this section
how it changes with changes in the form of the Lagrangian between t′ and
t′′ . In Section 10 we discuss how it changes with changes in the preparation
R′ or the experiment R′′ .
      The state at time t′ is dened completely by the preparation R′ . It can
be specied by a wave function ψ(x′ , t′ ) obtained as in (15), but containing
only integrals up to the time t′ . Likewise, the state characteristic of the
experiment (region R′′ ) can be dened by a function χ(x′′ , t′′ ) obtained from
(16) with integrals only beyond t′′ . The wave function ψ(x′′ , t′′ ) at time t′′
can, of course, also be gotten by appropriate use of (15). It can also be
gotten from ψ(x′ , t′ ) by (35). According to (17) with t′′ used instead of t,
the probability of being found in χ it prepared in ψ is the square of what
we shall call the transition amplitude χ∗ (x′′ , t′′ )ψ(x′′ , t′′ )dx′′ . We wish to
express this in terms of χ at t′′ and ψ at t′ . This we can do with the aid of
(35). Thus, the chance that a system prepared in state ψt′ at time t′ will be
found after t′′ to be in a state χt′′ is the square of the transition amplitude
                                       ∫     ∫
                  〈χt′′ |1|ψt′ 〉S = Lim . . . χ∗ (x′′ , t′′ ) ×
                                  →0
                                            dx0     dxj−1
                    ×exp(iS/ℏ)ψ(x′ , t′ )       ...       dxj ,                (38)
                                             A        A

                                        22
where we have used the abbreviation (36).
    In the language of ordinary quantum mechanics if the Hamiltonian, H,
is constant, ψ(x, t′′ ) = exp[−i(t′′ − t′ )H/ℏ]ψ(x, t′ ) so that (38) is the matrix
element of exp[−i(t′′ − t′ )H/ℏ] between states χt′′ and ψt′ .
    If F is any function of the coordinates xi for t′ < ti < t′′ , we shall dene
the transition element of F between the states ψ at t′ and χ at t′′ for the
action S as (x′′ ≡ xj , x′ ≡ x0 ):
                               ∫    ∫
         〈χt′′ |F |ψt′ 〉 = Lim . . . ×χ∗ (x′′ , t′′ )F (x0 , x1 , . . . xi ) ·
                           →0
                        j−1               ]
                         i∑                             dx0     dxj−1
                 ·exp         S(xi+1 , xi ) ψ(x′ , t′ )     ...          dxi . (39)
                         ℏ                               A        A
                        i=0

In the limit  → 0, F is a functional of the path x(t).
    We shall see presently why such quantities are important. It will be
easier to understand if we stop for a moment to nd out what the quantities
correspond to in conventional notation. Suppose F is simply xk , where
k corresponds to some time t = tk . Then on the right-hand side of (39)
the integrals from x0 to xk−1 may be performed to produce ψ(xk , t) or
exp[−i(t − t′ )H/ℏ]ψt′ . In like manner the integrals on xi for j ≥ i > k give
χ∗ (xk , t) or {exp[−i(t′′ − t)H/ℏ]χt′′ . Thus, the transition element of xk ,
                             ∫
                                             ′′                ′
           〈χt′′ |F |ψt′ 〉S = χ∗t′′ e(i/ℏ)h(t −t) xe−(i/ℏ)H(t−t ) ψt′ dx =
                                                    ∫
                                                = χ∗ (x, t)xψ(x, t)dx       (40)

is the matrix element of x at time t = tk between the state which would
develop at time t from ψt′ at t′ and the state which will develop from time t
to χt′′ at t′′ . It is, therefore, the matrix element of x(t) between these states.
    Likewise, according to (39) with F = xk+1 , the transition element of xk+1
is the matrix element of x(t+). The transition element of F = (xk+1 −xk )/
is the matrix element of (x(t + ) − x(t))/ or of i(Hx − xH)/ℏ, as is easily
shown from (40). We can call this the matrix element of velocity ẋ(t).
    Suppose we consider a second problem which diers from the rst be-
cause, for example, the potential is augmented by a small amount      U (, xt).
Then in the new problem the quantity replacing S is S ′ = S + i U (xi , ti ).
Substitution into (38) leads directly to
                                                 j
                                 〈       ∣    i ∑             ∣ 〉
                〈χt′′ |1|ψt′ 〉S ′ = χt′′ ∣exp      U (xi , ti )∣ψt′ .         (41)
                                         ∣                     ∣
                                              ℏ                     S
                                               i=1


                                         23
Thus, transition elements such as (39) are important insofar as F may arise
in some way from a change δS in an action expression. We denote, by
observable functionals, those functionals F which can be dened, (possibly
indirectly) in terms of the changes which are produced by possible changes
in the action S. The condition that a functional be observable is somewhat
similar to the condition that an operator be Hermitian. The observable
functionals are a restricted class because the action must remain a quadratic
function of velocities. From one observable functional others may be derived,
for example, by
                                                   j
                                   〈 ∣          i ∑             ∣ 〉
               〈χt′′ |F |ψt′ 〉S ′ = χt′′ ∣F exp      U (xi , ti )∣ψt′           (42)
                                         ∣                       ∣
                                                ℏ                     S
                                                 i=1

which is obtained from (39).
    Incidentally, (41) leads directly to an important perturbation formula.
If the eect of U is small the exponential can be expanded to rst order in
U and we nd
                              〈                i        ∑                  〉
           〈χt′′ |1|ψt′ 〉S ′ = χt′′ |1|ψt′ 〉S + 〈χt′′ |   U (xi , ti )|ψt′ . (43)
                                               ℏ
                                                       i
Of particular importance is the case that χt′′ is a state in which ψt′ would
not be found at all were it not. for the disturbance, U (i.e., 〈χt′′ |1|ψt′ 〉S = 0)
Then
                         1             ∑
                            |〈χ t ′′ |   U (xi , ti )|ψt′ 〉S |2               (44)
                        ℏ2
                                     i
is the probability of transition as induced to rst order by the perturbation.
In ordinary notation,
         ∑                        ∫ ∫                                            
                                        ∗ −(i/ℏ)H(t′′ −t)    −(i/ℏ)H(t−t′ )
 〈χt′′ |   U (xi , ti )|ψt′ 〉S =      χt′′ e             Ue                ψt′ dx dt
        i

so that (44) reduces to the usual expression 18 for time dependent pertur-
bations.


9. Newton’s Equations
       The Commutation Relation

 In this section we nd that dierent functionals may give identical results
when taken between any two states. This equivalence between functionals
  18
    P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (The Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1935), second edition, Section 47, Eq. (20)


                                         24
is the statement of operator equations in the new language.
    If F depends on the various coordinates, we can, of course, dene a new
functional ∂F/∂xk by dierentiating it with respect to one of its variables,
say xk (0 < k < j). If we calculate 〈χt′′ |∂F/∂xk |ψt′ 〉S by (39) the integral
on the right-hand side will contain ∂F/∂xk . The only other place that the
variable xk appears is in S. Thus, the integration on xk can be performed
by parts. The integrated part vanishes (assuming wave functions vanish
at innity) and we are left with the quantity −F (∂/∂xk )exp(iS/ℏ) in the
integral. However, (∂/∂xk )exp(iS/ℏ) = (i/ℏ)(∂S/∂xk )exp(iS/ℏ), so the
right side represents the transition element of −(i/ℏ)F (∂S/∂xk ), i.e.,
                  〈 ∣ ∂F ∣ 〉              i 〈 ∣∣ ∂S ∣∣ 〉
                   χt′′ ∣     ∣ ψ t′   = − χt′′ ∣F     ∣ ψ t′ .           (45)
                        ∣     ∣
                          ∂xk        S    ℏ        ∂xk        S

This very important relation shows that two dierent functionals may give
the same result for the transition element between any two states. We say
they are equivalent and symbolize the relation by
                                  ℏ ∂F     ∂S
                              −         ↔F    ,                           (46)
                                  i ∂xk S ∂xk
the symbol ↔ emphasizing the fact that functionals equivalent under one
             S
action may not be equivalent under another. The quantities in (46) need
not be observable. The equivalence is, nevertheless, true. Making use of
(36) one can write
                                                         
                ℏ ∂F        ∂S(xk+1 , xk ) ∂S(xk , xk−1 )
              −       ↔F                  +                 .       (47)
                i ∂xk S         ∂xk             ∂xk
This equation is true to zero and rst order in  and has as consequences
the commutation relations of momentum and coordinate, as well as the
Newtonian equations of motion in matrix form.
   In the case of our simple one-dimensional problem, S(xi+1 , xi ) is given
by the expression (15), so that

                   ∂S(xk+1 , xk )/∂xk = −m(xk+1 − xk )/,

and
             ∂S(xk , xk−1 )/∂xk = +m(xk − xk−1 )/ − V ′ (xk );
where we write V ′ (x) for the derivative of the potential, or force. Then (47)
becomes
                            (                         )             
          ℏ ∂F                 xk+1 − xk     xk − xk−1          ′
        −       ↔ F −m                    −               − V (xk ) .     (48)
          i ∂xk S                                

                                      25
If F does not depend on the variable xk , this gives Newton’s equations of
motion. For example, if F is constant, say unity, (48) just gives (dividing
by )                 (                          )
                    m xk+1 − xk      xk − xk−1
              0↔−                  −               − V ′ (xk ).
                S                        
Thus, the transition element of mass times acceleration [(xk+1 − xk )/ −
(xk − xk−1 )/]/ between any two states is equal to the transition element
of force −V ′ (xk ) between the same states. This is the matrix expression of
Newton’s law which holds in quantum mechanics.
    What happens if F does depend upon xk ? For example, let F = xk .
Then (48) gives, since ∂F/∂xk = 1,
                           (                        )              
               ℏ              xk+1 − xk   xk − xk−1
           − ↔ xk −m                    −              − V ′ (xk )
               i S                           

or, neglecting terms of order ,
                  (           )         (           )
                    xk+1 − xk             xk − xk−1        ℏ
               m                 xk − m               xk ↔ .                           (49)
                                                       S i

In order to transfer an equation such as (49) into conventional notation, we
shall have to discover what matrix corresponds to a quantity such as xk xk+1 .
It is clear from a study of (39) that if F is set equal to, say, f (xk )g(xk+1 ),
the corresponding operator in (40) is
                           ′′                                        ′
                 e−(i/ℏ)(t −t−)H g(x)e−(i/ℏ)H f (x)e−(i/ℏ)(t−t )H ,

the matrix element being taken between the states χt′′ and ψt′ . The op-
erators corresponding to functions of xk+1 will appear to the left of the
operators corresponding to functions of xk , i.e., the order of terms in a ma-
trix operator product corresponds to an order in time of the corresponding
factors in a functional. Thus, if the functional can and is written in such
a way that in each term factors corresponding to later times appear to the
left of factors corresponding to earlier terms, the corresponding operator can
immediately be written down if the order of the operators is kept the same
as in the functional. 19 Obviously, the order of factors in a functional is of
no consequence. The ordering just facilitates translation into conventional
operator notation. To write Eq. (49) in the way desired for easy translation
  19
     Dirac has also studied operators containing quantities referring to dierent times. See
reference 2.



                                            26
would require the factors in the second term on the left to be reversed in
order. We see, therefore, that it corresponds to

                                px − xp = ℏ/i

where we have written p for the operator mẋ.
    The relation between functionals and the corresponding operators is
denned above in terms of the order of the factors in time. It should be re-
marked that this rule must be especially carefully adhered to when quantities
involving velocities or higher derivatives are involved. The correct functional
to represent the operator (ẋ)2 is actually (xk+1 − xk )/(xk − xk−1 )/ rather
than [(xk+1 −xk )/]2 . The latter quantity diverges as 1/ as  → 0. This may
be seen by replacing the second term in (49) by its value xk+1 ·m(xk+1 −xk )/
calculated an instant  later in time. This does not change the equation to
zero order in . We then obtain (dividing by )
                          (               )2
                              xk+1 − xk              ℏ
                                               ↔−       .                  (50)
                                              S    im

This gives the result expressed earlier that the root mean square of the
“velocity” (xk+1 − xk )/ between two successive positions of the path is of
order −1/2 .
    It will not do then to write the functional for kinetic energy, say, simply
as
                             1
                               m[(xk+1 − xk )/]2                           (51)
                             2
for this quantity is innite as  → 0. In fact, it is not an observable func-
tional.
    One can obtain the kinetic energy as an observable functional by consid-
ering the rst-order change in transition amplitude occasioned by a change
in the mass of the particle. Let m be changed to m(1 + δ) for a short time,
say , around tk . The change in the action is 12 δm[xk+1 −xk )/]2 the deriva-
tive of which gives an expression like (51). But the change in m changes
the normalization constant 1/A corresponding to dxk as well as the action.
The constant is changed from (2πℏi/m)−1/2 to (2πℏi/m(1 + δ))−1/2 or by
1             −1/2 to rst order in δ. The total eect of the change in mass
2 δ(2πℏi/m)
in Eq. (38) to the rst order in δ is
                         1                          1
                  〈χt′′ | δim[(xk+1 − xk )/]2 /ℏ + δ|ψt′ 〉.
                         2                          2



                                      27
We expect the change of order δ lasting for a time  to be of order δ. Hence,
dividing by δi/ℏ, we can dene the kinetic energy functional as
                               1
                    K.E. =       m[(xk+1 − xk )/]2 + ℏ/2i.              (52)
                               2
This is nite as  → 0 in view of (50). By making use of an equation which
results from substituting m(xk+1 − xk )/ for F in (48) we can also show that
the expression (52) is equal (to order ) to
                              (            )(            )
                          1     xk+1 − xk      xk − xk−1
                  K.E. = m                                 .             (53)
                          2                        

That is, the easiest way to produce observable functionals involving powers
of the velocities is to replace these powers by a product of velocities, each
factor of which is taken at a slightly dierent time.


10. The Hamiltonian
        Momentum

  The Hamiltonian operator is of central importance in the usual formulation
of quantum mechanics. We shall study in this section the functional cor-
responding to this operator. We could immediately dene the Hamiltonian
functional by adding the kinetic energy functional (52) or (53) to the po-
tential energy. This method is articial and does not exhibit the important
relationship of the Hamiltonian to time. We shall dene the Hamiltonian
functional by the changes made in a state when it is displaced in time.
    To do this we shall have to digress a moment to point out that the
subdivision of time into equal intervals is not necessary. Clearly, any subdi-
vision into instants ti will be satisfactory; the limits are to be taken as the
largest spacing, ti+1 − ti approaches zero. The total action S must now be
represented as a sum
                               ∑
                          S=       S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ),              (54)
                                  i

where
                                                t∫i +1

                  S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ) =        L(ẋ(t), x(t))dt,    (55)
                                                ti




                                          28
the integral being taken along the classical path between xi , at ti and xi+1 at
ti+1 . For the simple one-dimensional example this becomes, with sucient
accuracy,
                                 { (                        }
                                  m xi+1 − xi 2
                                               )
     S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ) =                 − V (xi+1 ) (ti+1 − ti );  (56)
                                  2  ti+1 − ti

the corresponding normalization constant for integration on dxi is A =
(2πℏi(ti+1 − ti )/m)−1/2 .
     The relation of H to the change in a state with displacement in time
can now be studied. Consider a state ψ(t) dened by a space-time region
R′ . Now imagine that we consider another state at time t, ψδ (t), denned by
another region Rδ′ . Suppose the region Rδ′ is exactly the same as R′ except
that it is earlier by a time δ, i.e., displaced bodily toward the past by a time
δ. All the apparatus to prepare the system for Rδ′ is identical to that for R′
but is operated a time δ sooner. If L depends explicitly on time, it, too, is to
be displaced, i.e., the state ψδ is obtained from the L used for state ψ except
that the time t in Lδ is replaced by t+δ. We ask how does the state ψδ dier
from ψ? In any measurement the chance of nding the system in a xed
region R′′ is dierent for R′ and Rδ′ . Consider the change in the transition
element 〈χ|1|ψδ 〉Sδ produced by the shift δ. We can consider this shift as
eected by decreasing all values of ti by δ for i ≤ k and leaving all ti xed
for i > k, where the time t lies in the interval between tk+1 and tk . 20 This
change will have no eect on S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ) as dened by (55) as long
as both ti+1 and ti are changed by the same amount. On the other hand,
S(xk+1 , tk+1 ; xk , tk ) is changed to S(xk+1 , tk+1 ; xk , tk −δ). The constant 1/A
for the integration on dxk , is also altered to (2πℏi(tk+1 − tk + δ)/m)−1/2 .
The eect of these changes on the transition element is given to the rst
order in δ by
                                                   iδ
                        〈χ|1|ψ〉S − 〈χ|1|ψδ 〉Sδ = 〈χ|Hk |ψ〉S ,                     (57)
                                                   ℏ
here the Hamiltonian functional Hk is dened by
                           ∂S(xk+1 , tk+1 ; xk tk )         ℏ
                   Hk =                             +                .                 (58)
                                  ∂tk                 2i(tk+1 − tk )
  20
    From the point of view of mathematical rigor, if δ is nite, as  → 0 one gets into
diculty in that, for example, the interval tk+1 −tk is kept nite. This can be straightened
out by assuming δ to vary with time and to be turned on smoothly before t = tk and
turned o smoothly after t = tk . Then keeping the rime variation of δ xed, let  → 0.
Then seek the rst-order change as δ → 0. The result is essentially the same as that of
the crude procedure used above.


                                            29
The last term is due to the change in 1/A and serves to keep Hk nite as
 → 0. For example, for the expression (56) this becomes
                     (           )
                  m xk+1 − xk               ℏ
            Hk =                   +                 + V (xk+1 ),
                   2   tk+1 − tk      2i(tk+1 − tk )
which is just the sum of the kinetic energy functional (52) and that of the
potential energy V (xk+1 ).
    The wave function ψδ (x, t) represents, of course, the same state as ψ(x, t)
will be after time δ, i.e., ψ(x, t + δ). Hence, (57) is intimately related to the
operator equation (31).
    One could also consider changes occasioned by a time shift in the nal
state χ. Of course, nothing new results in this way for it is only the relative
shift of χ and ψ which counts. One obtains an alternative expression
                           ∂S(xk+1 , tk+1 ; xk , tk )         ℏ
                 Hk = −                               +                .              (59)
                                 ∂tk+1                  2i(tk+1 − tk )
This diers from (58) only by terms of order . The time rate of change
of a functional can be computed by considering the eect of shifting both
initial and nal state together. This has the same eect as calculating the
transition element of the functional referring to a later time. What results
is the analog of the operator equation
                                    ℏ
                                      ḟ = Hf − fH.
                                    i
   The momentum functional pt can be dened in an analogous way by
considering the changes made by displacements of position:
                                                     i∆
                     〈χ|1|ψ〉S − 〈χ|1|ψ∆ 〉S∆ =           〈χ|pk |ψ〉S .
                                                      ℏ
The state ψ∆ is prepared from a region R∆   ′ which is identical to region R′

except that it is moved a distance ∆ in space. (The Lagrangian, if it depends
explicitly on x, must be altered to L∆ = L(ẋ, x − ∆) for times previous to
t.) One nds 21
                              ∂S(xk+1 , xk )    ∂S(xk+1 , xk )
                       pk =                  =−                .                      (60)
                                 ∂xk+1              ∂xk
  21
    We did not immediately substitute pi from (60) into (47) because (47) would then
no longer have been valid to both zero order and the rst order in . We could derive
the commutation relations, but not the equations of motion. The two expressions in (60)
represent the momenta at each end of the interval ti , to ti+1 . They dier by V ′ (xk+1 )
because of the force acting during the time 


                                            30
Since ψ∆ (x, t) is equal to ψ(x − ∆, t), the close connection between pk and
the x–derivative of the wave function is established.
    Angular momentum operators are related in an analogous way to rota-
tions.
    The derivative with respect to ti+1 of S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ) appears in the
denition of Hi . The derivative with respect to ti+1 denes pi . But the
derivative with respect to ti+1 of S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ) is related to the deriva-
tive with respect to xi+1 , for the function S(xi+1 , ti+1 ; xi , ti ) dened by (55)
satises the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. Thus, the Hamilton-Jacobi equa-
tion is an equation expressing Hi , in terms of the pi . In other words, it
expresses the fact that time displacements of states are related to space dis-
placements of the same states. This idea leads directly to a derivation of
the Schroedinger equation which is far more elegant than the one exhibited
in deriving Eq. (30).


11. Inadequacies of the Formulation
   The formulation given here suers from a serious drawback. The mathe-
matical concepts needed are new. At present, it requires an unnatural and
cumbersome subdivision of the time interval to make the meaning of the
equations clear. Considerable improvement can be made through the use of
the notation and concepts of the mathematics of functionals. However, it
was thought best to avoid this in a rst presentation. One needs, in addi-
tion, an appropriate measure for the space of the argument functions x(t)
of the functionals.22
    It is also incomplete from the physical standpoint. One of the most
important characteristics of quantum mechanics is its invariance under uni-
tary transformations. These correspond to the canonical transformations of
classical mechanics. Of course, the present formulation, being equivalent to
ordinary formulations, can be mathematically demonstrated to be invariant
under these transformations. However, it has not been formulated in such
a way that it is physically obvious that it is invariant. This incompleteness
shows itself in a denite way. No direct procedure has been outlined to
  22
    There are very interesting mathematical problems involved in the attempt to avoid the
subdivision and limiting processes. Some sort of complex measure is being associated with
the space of functions x(t). Finite results can be obtained under unexpected circumstances
because the measure is not positive everywhere, but the contributions from most of the
paths largely cancel out. These curious mathematical problems are sidestepped by the
subdivision process. However, one feels as Cavalieri must have felt calculating the volume
of a pyramid before the invention of calculus.


                                           31
describe measurements of quantities other than position. Measurements of
momentum, for example, of one particle, can be dened in terms of mea-
surements of positions of other particles. The result of the analysis of such
a situation does show the connection of momentum measurements to the
Fourier transform of the wave function. But this is a rather roundabout
method to obtain such an important physical result. It is to be expected
that the postulates can be generalized by the replacement of the idea of
“paths in a region of space-time R” to “paths of class R,” or “paths having
property R.” But which properties correspond to which physical measure-
ments has not been formulated in a general way.


12. A Possibility Generalization
  The formulation suggests an obvious generalization. There are interesting
classical problems which satisfy a principle of least action but for which
the action cannot be written as an integral of a function of positions and
velocities. The action may involve accelerations, for example. Or, again, if
interactions are not instantaneous,
                                it may involve the product of coordinates
at two dierent times, such as x(t)x(t + T )dt. The action, then, cannot be
broken up into a sum of small contributions as in (10). As a consequence,
no wave function is available to describe a state. Nevertheless, a transition
probability can be dened for getting from a region R′ into another R′′ .
Most of the theory of the transition elements 〈χt′′ |F |ψt′ 〉S can be carried
over. One simply invents a symbol, such as 〈R′′ |F |R′ 〉S by an equation such
as (39) but with the expressions (19) and (20) for ψ and χ substituted, and
the more general action substituted for S. Hamiltonian and momentum
functionals can be dened as in section (10). Further details may be found
in a thesis by the author.23


13. Application to Eliminate Field Oscillators
  One characteristic of the present formulation is that it can give one a sort
of bird’s-eye view of the space-time relationships in a given situation. Before
  23
     The theory of electromagnetism described by J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 17, 157 (1945) can be expressed in a principle of least action involving
the coordinates of particles alone. It was an attempt to quantize this theory, without
reference to the elds, which led the author to study the formulation of quantum mechanics
given here. The extension of the ideas to cover the case of more general action functions
was developed in his Ph.D. thesis, “The principle of least action in quantum mechanics”
submitted to Princeton University, 1942.


                                           32
the integrations on the x, are performed in an expression such as (39) one
has a sort of format into which various F functionals may be inserted. One
can study how what goes on in the quantum-mechanical system at dierent
times is interrelated. To make these vague remarks somewhat more denite,
we discuss an example.
     In classical electrodynamics the elds describing, for instance, the in-
teraction of two particles can be represented as a set of oscillators. The
equations of motion of these oscillators may be solved and the oscillators
essentially eliminated (Lienard and Wiechert potentials). The interactions
which result involve relationships of the motion of one particle at one time,
and of the other particle at another time. In quantum electrodynamics the
eld is again represented as a set of oscillators. But the motion of the os-
cillators cannot be worked out and the oscillators eliminated. It is true
that the oscillators representing longitudinal waves may be eliminated. The
result is instantaneous electrostatic interaction. The electrostatic elimina-
tion is very instructive as it shows up the diculty of self-interaction very
distinctly. In fact, it shows it up so clearly that there is no ambiguity in
deciding what term is incorrect and should be omitted. This entire process
is not relativistically invariant, nor is the omitted term. It would seem to be
very desirable if the oscillators, representing transverse waves, could also be
eliminated. This presents an almost insurmountable problem in the conven-
tional quantum mechanics. We expect that the motion of a particle a at one
time depends upon the motion of b at a previous time, and vice versa. A
wave function ψ(xa , xb ; t), however, can only describe the behavior of both
particles at one time. There is no way to keep track of what b did in the
past in order to determine the behavior of a. The only way is to specify the
state of the set of oscillators at t, which serve to “remember” what b (and
a) had been doing.
     The present formulation permits the solution of the motion of all the
oscillators and their complete elimination from the equations describing the
particles. This is easily done. One must simply solve for the motion of
the oscillators before one integrates over the various variables xi , for the
particles. It is the integration over xi . which tries to condense the past
history into a single state function. This we wish to avoid. Of course, the
result depends upon the initial and nal states of the oscillator. If they are
specied, the result is an equation for 〈χt′′ |1|ψt′ 〉 like (38), but containing
as a factor, besides exp(iS/ℏ) another functional G depending only on the
coordinates describing the paths of the particles.
     We illustrate briey how this is done in a very simple case. Suppose
a particle, coordinate x(t), Lagrangian L(ẋ, x) interacts with an oscillator,

                                      33
coordinate g(t), Lagrangian 12 (q̇ 2 − ω 2 q 2 ) through a term γ(x, t)q(t) in the
Lagrangian for the system. Here γ(x, t) is any function of the coordinate
x(t) of the particle and the time. 24 Suppose we desire the probability of
a transition from a state at time t′ , in which the particle’s wave function is
ψt′ and the oscillator is in energy level n, to a state at t′′ with the particle
in χt′′ and oscillator in level m. This is the square of
                                                     ∫     ∫
                     〈χt′′ ϕm |1|ψt′ ϕn 〉Sp +S0 +SI = . . . ϕ∗m (qi )χ∗t′′ (xi )
      i                                   dx0 dq0     dxj−1 dqj−1
  ×exp (Sp + S0 + S1 )ψt′ (x0 )ϕn (q0 ) ·         ...             dxi dqi .              (61)
      ℏ                                    A a          A     a
    Here ϕn 9q) is the wave function for the oscillator in state n, Sp is the
action
                              j−1
                              ∑
                                  Sp (xi+1 , xi )
                                      i=0

calculated for the particle as though the oscillator were absent,
                         j−1
                              (                         ]
                                qi+1 − qi 2 ω 2 2
                         ∑                 )
                   S0 =                        −     q
                               2                  2 i+1
                              i=0

that of the oscillator alone, and
                                              j−1
                                              ∑
                                       SI =         γi qi
                                              i=0

(where γi = γ(xi , ti )) is the action of interaction between the particle and the
oscillator. The normalizing constant, a, for the oscillator is (2πi/ℏ)−1/2 .
Now the exponential depends quadratically upon all the qi . Hence, the
integrations over all the variables qi , for 0 < i < j can easily be performed.
One is integrating a sequence of Gaussian integrals.
    The result of these integrations is, writing T = t′′ −t′ , (2πiℏ sin ωT /ω)−1/2
expi(Sp + Q(qi , q0 ))/ℏ, where Q(qj , q0 ) go) turns out to be just the classical
  24
    The generalization to the case that γ depends on the velocity, ẋ, of the particle presents
no problem.




                                              34
action for the forced harmonic oscillator (see reference 15). Explicitly it is
                                      [
               Q(qj , q0 ) = 2 sinω ωT (cos ωT )(qj2 + q02 ) − 2qj q0

                 t′′                             ′′
             2q0                    ′     2qj t
            + ω      γ(t) sin ω(t − t )dt + ω       γ(t) sin ω(t′′ − t)dt
                  ′ t                            ′    t
                                                                        ]
                   t′′ t
             −   2         γ(t)γ(s) sin ω(t′′ − t) × sin ω(s − t′ )dsdt .
                 ω 2 t′ t′

It has been written as though γ(t) were a continuous function of time. The
integrals really should be split into Riemann sums and the quantity γ(xi , ti )
substituted for γ(ti ). Thus, Q depends on the coordinates of the particle at
all times through the γ(xi , ti ) and on that of the oscillator at times t′ and
t′′ only. Thus, the quantity (61) becomes
                                                   
               〈χt′′ ϕm |1|ψt′ ϕn 〉Sp+S0 +SI = . . . χ∗t′′ (xi )Gmn ×
                  (          )
                      iSp                          dxj−1
          ×exp                   ψt′ (x0 ) dx 0
                                            A . . . A dxi = 〈χt |Gmn |ψt 〉Sp
                                                               ′′       ′
                       ℏ

which now contains the coordinates of the particle only, the quantity Gmn
being given by
                             ∫ ∫
                        −1/2
 Gmn = (2πiℏ sin ωT /ω)          ϕ∗m (qi ) × exp(iQ(qi , q0 )/ℏ)ϕn (q0 )dqj dq0 .

    Proceeding in an analogous manner one nds that all of the oscillators of
the electromagnetic eld can be eliminated from a description of the motion
of the charges.


Statistical Mechanics
      Spin and Relativity

  Problems in the theory of measurement and statistical quantum mechanics
are often simplied when set up from the point of view described here. For
example, the inuence of a perturbing measuring instrument can be inte-
grated out in principle as we did in detail for the oscillator. The statistical
density matrix has a fairly obvious and useful generalization. It results from
considering the square of (38). It is an expression similar to (38) but con-
taining integrations over two sets of variables dxi , and dx′i . The exponential

                                              35
is replaced by expi(S − S ′ )/ℏ, where S ′ is the same function of the x′i as S is
of xi . It is required, for example, to describe the result of the elimination of
the eld oscillators where, say, the nal state of the oscillators is unspecied
and one desires only the sum over all nal states m.
    Spin may be included in a formal way. The Pauli spin equation can be
obtained in this way: One replaces the vector potential interaction term in
S(xi+1 , xi ),
                    e                         e
                      (xi+1 − xi ) · A(xi ) + (xi+1 − xi ) · A(xi+1 )
                   2c                        2c
arising from expression (13) by the expression
        e                                     e
           (σ · (xi+1 − xi ))(σ · A(xi )) + (σ · A(xi+1 ))(σ · (xi+1 − xi )).
        2c                                   2c
Here A is the vector potential, xi+1 and x, the vector positions of a particle
at times ti+1 and ti , and σ is Pauli’s spin vector matrix. The quantity
Φ must now be expressed as Πi expiS(xi+1 , xi )/ℏ for this diers from the
exponential of the sum of S(xi+1 , xi ). Thus, Φ is now a spin matrix.
    The Klein Gordon relativistic equation can also be obtained formally by
adding a fourth coordinate to specify a path. One considers a “path” as
being specied by four functions x(µ) (τ ) of a parameter τ . The parameter
τ now goes in steps  as the variable t went previously. The quantities
x(1) (t), x(2) (t), x(3) (t) are the space coordinates of a particle and x(4) (t) is a
corresponding time. The Lagrangian used is
                      ′
                      ∑
                            [(dxµ /dτ )2 + (e/c)(dxµ /dτ )Aµ ],
                      µ=1

where Aµ is the 4-vector potential and the terms in the sum for µ = 1, 2, 3 are
taken with reversed sign. If one seeks a wave function which depends upon
τ periodically, one can show this must satisfy the Klein Gordon equation.
The Dirac equation results from a modication of the Lagrangian used for
the Klein Gordon equation, which is analagous to the modication of the
non-relativistic Lagrangian required for the Pauli equation. What results
directly is the square of the usual Dirac operator.
    These results for spin and relativity are purely formal and add nothing
to the understanding of these equations. There are other ways of obtaining
the Dirac equation which oer some promise of giving a clearer physical
interpretation to that important and beautiful equation.
    The author sincerely appreciates the helpful advice of Professor and Mrs.
H. C. Corben and of Professor H. A. Bethe. He wishes to thank Professor J.
A. Wheeler for very many discussions during the early stages of the work.

                                          36
