       THE PRINCIPLE OF LEAST ACTION IN
             QUANTUM MECHANICS

                        RICHARD P. FEYNMAN




                                Abstract

   A generalization of quantum mechanics is given in which the cen-
   tral mathematical concept is the analogue of the action in classical
   mechanics. It is therefore applicable to mechanical systems whose
   equations of motion cannot be put into Hamiltonian form. It is
   only required that some form of least action principle be available.
       It is shown that if the action is the time integral of a function
   of velocity and position (that is, if a Lagrangian exists), the gener-
   alization reduces to the usual form of quantum mechanics. In the
   classical limit, the quantum equations go over into the correspond-
   ing classical ones, with the same action function.
       As a special problem, because of its application to electrody-
   namics, and because the results serve as a confirmation of the pro-
   posed generalization, the interaction of two systems through the
   agency of an intermediate harmonic oscillator is discussed in de-
   tail. It is shown that in quantum mechanics, just as in classical
   mechanics, under certain circumstances the oscillator can be com-
   pletely eliminated, its place being taken by a direct, but, in general,
   not instantaneous, interaction between the two systems.
       The work is non-relativistic throughout.

I. Introduction

PlanckŌĆÖs discovery in 1900 of the quantum properties of light led to
an enormously deeper understanding of the attributes and behaviour
of matter, through the advent of the methods of quantum mechanics.
When, however, these same methods are turned to the problem of
light and the electromagnetic ’¼üeld great di’¼āculties arise which have
not been surmounted satisfactorily, so that PlanckŌĆÖs observations still

                                     1
2            FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


remain without a consistent fundamental interpretation. 1
    As is well known, the quantum electrodynamics that have been
developed su’¼Ćer from the di’¼āculty that, taken literally, they predict
in’¼ünite values for many experimental quantities which are obviously
quite ’¼ünite, such as for example, the shift in energy of spectral lines
due to interaction of the atom and the ’¼üeld. The classical ’¼üeld the-
ory of Maxwell and Lorentz serves as the jumping-o’¼Ć point for this
quantum electrodynamics. The latter theory, however, does not take
over the ideas of classical theory concerning the internal structure of
the electron, which ideas are so necessary to the classical theory to
attain ’¼ünite values for such quantities as the inertia of an electron.
The researches of Dirac into the quantum properties of the electron
have been so successful in interpreting such properties as its spin and
magnetic moment, and the existence of the positron, that is hard to
believe that it should be necessary in addition to attribute internal
structure to it.
    It has become, therefore, increasingly more evident that before
a satisfactory quantum electrodynamics can be developed it will be
necessary to develop a classical theory capable of describing charges
without internal structure. Many of these have now been developed,
but we will concern ourselves in this thesis with the theory of action
at a distance worked out in 1941 by J. A. Wheeler and the author. 2
    The new viewpoint pictures electrodynamic interaction as direct
interaction at a distance between particles. The ’¼üeld then becomes
a mathematical construction to aid in the solution of problems in-
volving these interactions. The following principles are essential to
the altered viewpoint:
(1) The acceleration of a point charge is due to the sum of its in-
teractions with other charged particles. A charge does not act on
itself.

1  It is important to develop a satisfactory quantum electrodynamics also for another
reason. At the present time theoretical physics is confronted with a number of fun-
damental unsolved problems dealing with the nucleus, the interactions of protons and
neutrons, etc. In an attempt to tackle these, meson ’¼üeld theories have been set up in
analogy to the electromagnetic ’¼üeld theory. But the analogy is unfortunately all too
perfect; the in’¼ünite answers are all too prevalent and confusing.
2  Not published. See, however, Phys. Rev. 59, 683 (1941).
               The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                    3


(2) The force of interaction which one charge exerts on another is
calculated by means of the Lorentz force formula, F = e[E+ vc ├ŚH], in
which the ’¼üelds are the ’¼üelds generated by the ’¼ürst charge according
to MaxwellŌĆÖs equations.
(3) The fundamental (microscopic) phenomena in nature are sym-
metrical with respect to interchange of past and future. This requires
that the solution of MaxwellŌĆÖs equation to be used in computing the
interactions is to be half the retarded plus half the advanced solution
of Lienard and Wiechert.
    These principles, at ’¼ürst sight at such variance with elementary
notions of causality, do in fact lead to essential agreement with the
results of the more usual form of electrodynamics, and at the same
time permit a consistent description of point charges and lead to a
unique law of radiative damping. That this is the case has been
shown in the work already referred to (see note 2). It is shown that
these principles are equivalent to the equations of motion resulting
from a principle of least action. The action function (due to Tetrode, 3
and, independently, to Fokker4 ) involves only the coordinates of the
particles, no mention of ’¼üelds being made. The ’¼üeld is therefore a
derived concept, and cannot be pictured as analogous to the vibra-
tions of some medium, with its own degrees of freedom (for example,
the energy density is not necessarily positive.) Perhaps a word or
two as to what aspects of this theory make it a reasonable basis for
a quantum theory of light would not be amiss.
    When one attempts to list those phenomena which seem to in-
dicate that light is quantized, the ’¼ürst type of phenomenon which
comes to mind are like the photoelectric e’¼Ćect or the Compton ef-
fect. One is however, struck by the fact that since these phenomena
deal with the interaction of light and matter their explanation may
lie in the quantum aspects of matter, rather than requiring photons
of light. This supposition is aided by the fact that if one solves the

3  H. Tetrode, Zeits. f. Physik 10, 317 (1922).
4  A. D. Fokker, Zeits. f. Physik 38, 386 (1929); Physica 9, 33 (1929); Physica 12, 145
(1932).
4           FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


problem of an atom being perturbed by a potential varying sinu-
soidally with the time, which would be the situation if matter were
quantum mechanical and light classical, one ’¼ünds indeed that it will
in all probability eject an electron whose energy shows an increase
of h╬Į, where ╬Į is the frequency of variation of the potential. In a
similar way an electron perturbed by the potential of two beams of
light of di’¼Ćerent frequencies and di’¼Ćerent directions will make tran-
sitions to a state in which its momentum and energy is changed by
an amount just equal to that given by the formulas for the Compton
e’¼Ćect, with one beam corresponding in direction and wavelength to
the incoming photon and the other to the outgoing one. In fact, one
may correctly calculate in this way the probabilities of absorption
and induced emission of light by an atom.
    When, however, we come to spontaneous emission and the mech-
anism of the production of light, we come much nearer to the real
reason for the apparent necessity of photons. The fact that an atom
emits spontaneously at all is impossible to explain by the simple
picture given above. In empty space an atom emits light and yet
there is no potential to perturb the systems and so force it to make a
transition. The explanation of modern quantum mechanical electro-
dynamics is that the atom is perturbed by the zero-point ’¼éuctuations
of the quantized radiation ’¼üeld.
    It is here that the theory of action at a distance gives us a di’¼Ćerent
viewpoint. It says that an atom alone in empty space would, in fact,
not radiate. Radiation is a consequence of the interaction with other
atoms (namely, those in the matter which absorbs the radiation).
We are then led to the possibility that the spontaneous radiation
of an atom in quantum mechanics also, may not be spontaneous
at all, but induced by the interaction with other atoms, and that
all of the apparent quantum properties of light and the existence of
photons may be nothing more than the result of matter interacting
with matter directly, and according to quantum mechanical laws.
    An attempt to investigate this possibility and to ’¼ünd a quantum
analogue of the theory of action at a distance, meets ’¼ürst the di’¼āculty
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics        5


that it may not be correct to represent the ’¼üeld as a set of harmonic
oscillators, each with its own degree of freedom, since the ’¼üeld in
actuality is entirely determined by the particles. On the other hand,
an attempt to deal quantum mechanically directly with the parti-
cles, which would seem to be the most satisfactory way to proceed,
is faced with the circumstance that the equations of motion of the
particles are expressed classically as a consequence of a principle of
least action, and cannot, it appears, be expressed in Hamiltonian
form.
    For this reason a method of formulating a quantum analog of sys-
tems for which no Hamiltonian, but rather a principle of least action,
exists has been worked out. It is a description of this method which
constitutes this thesis. Although the method was worked out with
the express purpose of applying it to the theory of action at a dis-
tance, it is in fact independent of that theory, and is complete in
itself. Nevertheless most of the illustrative examples will be taken
from problems which arise in the action at a distance electrodynam-
ics. In particular, the problem of the equivalence in quantum me-
chanics of direct interaction and interaction through the agency of
an intermediate harmonic oscillator will be discussed in detail. The
solution of this problem is essential if one is going to be able to com-
pare a theory which considers ’¼üeld oscillators as real mechanical and
quantized systems, with a theory which considers the ’¼üeld as just a
mathematical construction of classical electrodynamics required to
simplify the discussion of the interactions between particles. On the
other hand, no excuse need be given for including this problem, as its
solution gives a very direct con’¼ürmation, which would otherwise be
lacking, of the general utility and correctness of the proposed method
of formulating the quantum analogue of systems with a least action
principle.
    The results of the application of these methods to quantum elec-
trodynamics is not included in this thesis, but will be reserved for a
future time when they shall have been more completely worked out.
6          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


It has been the purpose of this introduction to indicate the motiva-
tion for the problems which are discussed herein. It is to be empha-
sized again that the work described here is complete in itself without
regard to its application to electrodynamics, and it is this circum-
stance which makes it appear advisable to publish these results as an
independent paper. One should therefore take the viewpoint that the
present paper is concerned with the problem of ’¼ünding a quantum
mechanical description applicable to systems which in their classi-
cal analogue are expressible by a principle of least action, and not
necessarily by Hamiltonian equations of motion.
    The thesis is divided into two main parts. The ’¼ürst deals with the
properties of classical systems satisfying a principle of least action,
while the second part contains the method of quantum mechanical
description applicable to these systems. In the ’¼ürst part are also
included some mathematical remarks about functionals. All of the
analysis will apply to non-relativistic systems. The generalization to
the relativistic case is not at present known.


II. Least Action in Classical Mechanics

1. The Concept of a Functional
The mathematical concept of a functional will play a rather predom-
inant role in what is to follow so that it seems advisable to begin
at once by describing a few of the properties of functionals and the
notation used in this paper in connection with them. No attempt is
made at mathematical rigor.
   To say F is a functional of the function q(Žā) means that F is a
number whose value depends on the form of the function q(Žā) (where
Žā is just a parameter used to specify the form of q(Žā)). Thus,
                             Ōł×
                                          2
                       F =       q(Žā)2 eŌłÆŽā dŽā                    (1)
                              ŌłÆŌł×

is a functional of q(Žā) since it associates with every choice of the
function q(Žā) a number, namely the integral. Also, the area under
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics           7


a curve is a functional of the function representing the curve, since
to each such function a number, the area is associated. The expected
value of the energy in quantum mechanics is a functional of the wave
function. Again,

                                       F = q(0)                         (2)

is a functional, which is especially simple because its value depends
only on the value of the function q(Žā) at the one point Žā = 0.
    We shall write, if F is a functional of q(Žā), F [q(Žā)]. A functional
may have its argument more than one function, or functions of more
than one parameter, as
                              Ōł× Ōł×
      F [x(t, s), y(t, s)] =         x(t, s)y(t, s) sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)dtds .
                               ŌłÆŌł×      ŌłÆŌł×

   A functional F [q(Žā)] may be looked upon as a function of an
in’¼ünite number of variables, the variables being the value of the
function q(Žā) at each point Žā. If the interval of the range of Žā is
divided up into a large number of points Žā i , and the value of the
function at these points is q(Žāi ) = qi , say, then approximately our
functional may be written as a function of the variables q i . Thus, in
the case of equation (1) we could write, approximately,
                                       Ōł×
                                                   2
               F (┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę qi ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ) =          qi2 eŌłÆŽāi (Žāi+1 ŌłÆ Žāi ) .
                                       i=ŌłÆŌł×

We may de’¼üne a process analogous to di’¼Ćerentiation for our func-
tionals. Suppose the function q(Žā) is altered slightly to q(Žā) + ╬╗(Žā)
by the addition of a small function ╬╗(Žā). From our approximate
viewpoint we can say that each of the variables is changed from q i
to qi + ╬╗i . The function is thereby changed by an amount
                          ŌłéF (┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę qi ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę )
                                                ╬╗i .
                                   Ōłéqi
                              i

   In the case of a continuous number of variables, the sum becomes
an integral and we may write, to the ’¼ürst order in ╬╗,
                                         
             F [q(Žā) + ╬╗(Žā)] ŌłÆ F [q(Žā)] = K(t)╬╗(t)dt ,           (3)
8             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


where K(t) depends on F , and is what we shall call the functional
derivative of F with respect to q at t, and shall symbolize, with
                   [q(Žā)]                             i ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę )
Eddington,5 by ╬┤F╬┤q(t)    . It is not simply ŌłéF (┬Ę┬Ę┬Ęq
                                                 Ōłéqi          as this is in
                                                       ŌłéF
general in’¼ünitesimal, but is rather the sum of these Ōłéq  i
                                                           over a short
range of i, say from i + k to i ŌłÆ k, divided by the interval of the
parameter, Žāi+k ŌłÆ ŽāiŌłÆk .
   Thus we write,
                                         
                                           ╬┤F [q(Žā)]
            F [q(Žā) + ╬╗(Žā)] = F [q(Žā)] +             ╬╗(t)dt
                                             ╬┤q(t)
                              + higher order terms in ╬╗ .           (4)

For example, in equation (1) if we substitute q + ╬╗ for q, we obtain
                    
                                                       2
        F [q + ╬╗] = [q(Žā)2 + 2q(Žā)╬╗(Žā) + ╬╗(Žā)2 ]eŌłÆŽā dŽā
                                       
                           2 ŌłÆŽā2                         2
                  = q(Žā) e       dŽā + 2 q(Žā)╬╗(Žā)eŌłÆŽā dŽā
                          + higher terms in ╬╗ .
                                    [q]                     2
                                                ŌłÆt . In a similar way, if
Therefore, in this case, we have ╬┤F
                                 ╬┤q(t) = 2q(t)e
                       ╬┤F
F [q(Žā)] = q(0), then ╬┤q(t) = ╬┤(t), where ╬┤(t) is DiracŌĆÖs delta symbol,
de’¼üned by ╬┤(t)f (t)dt = f (0) for any continuous function f .
                                   ╬┤F
    The function q(Žā) for which ╬┤q(t)  is zero for all t is that function
for which F is an extremum. For example, in classical mechanics the
action,
                             
                       A = L(q╠ć(Žā), q(Žā))dŽā                           (5)

is a functional of q(Žā). Its functional derivative is,
              ╬┤A      d         ŌłéL(q╠ć(t), q(t))         ŌłéL(q╠ć(t), q(t))
                   =ŌłÆ                               +                   .          (6)
             ╬┤q(t)    dt             Ōłé q╠ć                     Ōłéq
If A is an extremum the right hand side is zero.

5  A. S. Eddington, ŌĆ£The Mathematical Theory of RelativityŌĆØ (1923) p. 139.
EditorŌĆÖs note: We have changed EddingtonŌĆÖs symbol for the functional derivative to that
now commonly in use.
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         9


2. The Principle of Least Action
For most mechanical systems it is possible to ’¼ünd a functional, A ,
called the action, which assigns a number to each possible mechanical
path, q1 (Žā), q2 (Žā) . . . qN (Žā), (we suppose N degrees of freedom, each
with a coordinate qn (Žā), a function of a parameter (time) Žā) in such
a manner that this number is an extremum for an actual path q╠ä(Žā)
which could arise in accordance with the laws of motion. Since this
extremum often is a minimum this is called the principle of least
action. It is often convenient to use the principle itself, rather than
the Newtonian equations of motion as the fundamental mechanical
law. The form of the functional A [q 1 (Žā) . . . qN (Žā)] depends on the
mechanical problem in question.
    According to the principle of least action, then, if
A [q1 (Žā) . . . qN (Žā)] is the action functional, the equations of motion
are N in number and are given by,
                 ╬┤A           ╬┤A                   ╬┤A
                        = 0,         = 0, . . . ,         =0         (7)
                ╬┤q1 (t)      ╬┤q2 (t)              ╬┤qN (t)
                                  ╬┤A
(We shall often simply write ╬┤q(t)    = 0, as if there were only one
variable). That is to say if all the derivatives of A , with respect to
qn (t), computed for the functions q╠ä m (Žā) are zero for all t and all n,
then q╠äm (Žā) describes a possible mechanical motion for the systems.
    We have given an example, in equation (5), for the usual one
dimensional problem when the action is the time integral of a La-
grangian (a function of position and velocity, only). As another ex-
ample consider an action function arising in connection with the
theory of action at a distance:
              Ōł×
                    m(x╠ć(t))2
        A =                   ŌłÆ V (x(t)) + k 2 x╠ć(t)x╠ć(t + T0 ) dt .  (8)
              ŌłÆŌł×        2
It is approximately the action for a particle in a potential V (x), and
interacting with itself in a distant mirror by means of retarded and
advanced waves. The time it takes for light to reach the mirror from
the particle is assumed constant, and equal to T 0 /2. The quantity
10              FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


k2 depends on the charge on the particle and its distance from the
mirror. If we vary x(t) by a small amount, ╬╗(t), the consequent
variation in A is,
              Ōł×
       ╬┤A =        {mx╠ć(t)╬╗╠ć(t) ŌłÆ V  (x(t))╬╗(t) + k 2 ╬╗╠ć(t)x╠ć(t + T0 )
                    ŌłÆŌł×

                 + k 2 ╬╗╠ć(t + T0 )x╠ć(t)}dt
                  Ōł×
               =       {ŌłÆmx╠ł(t) ŌłÆ V  (x(t)) ŌłÆ k 2 x╠ł(t + T0 )
                    ŌłÆŌł×

                                                  by integrating
                  ŌłÆ k 2 x╠ł(t ŌłÆ T0 )}╬╗(t)dt ,
                                                  by part

so that, according to our de’¼ünition (4), we may write,
        ╬┤A
             = ŌłÆmx╠ł(t) ŌłÆ V  (x(t)) ŌłÆ k 2 x╠ł(t + T0 ) ŌłÆ k 2 x╠ł(t ŌłÆ T0 ) .               (9)
       ╬┤x(t)
The equation of motion of this system is obtained, according to (7)
            ╬┤A
by setting ╬┤x(t) equal to zero. It will be seen that the force acting at
time t depends on the motion of the particle at other time than t.
The equations of motion cannot be described directly in Hamiltonian
form.

3. Conservation of Energy. Constants of the Motion 6
The problem we shall study in this section is that of determining to
what extent the concepts of conservation of energy, momentum, etc.,
may be carried over to mechanical problems with a general form
of action function. The usual principle of conservation of energy
asserts that there is a function of positions at the time t, say, and
of velocities of the particles whose value, for the actual motion of
the particles, does not change with time. In our more general case
however, the forces do not involve the positions of the particles only
at one particular time, but usually a calculation of the forces requires

6    This section is not essential to an understanding of the remainder of the paper.
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics             11


a knowledge of the paths of the particles over some considerable
range of time (see for example, Eq. (9)). It is not possible in this
case generally to ’¼ünd a constant of the motion which only involves
the positions and velocities at one time.
    For example, in the theory of action at a distance, the kinetic
energy of the particles is not conserved. To ’¼ünd a conserved quantity
one must add a term corresponding to the ŌĆ£energy in the ’¼üeldŌĆØ. The
’¼üeld, however, is a functional of the motion of the particles, so that
it is possible to express this ŌĆ£’¼üeld energyŌĆØ in terms of the motion of
the particles. For our simple example (8), account of the equations
of motion (9), the quantity,
                                            t+T0
             m(x╠ć(t))2
      E(t) =           + V (x(t)) ŌłÆ k 2             x╠ł(Žā ŌłÆ T0 )x╠ć(Žā)dŽā
                2                           t

              + k2 x╠ć(t)x╠ć(t + T0 ) ,                                    (10)

has, indeed, a zero derivative with respect to time. The ’¼ürst two
terms represent the ordinary energy of the particles. The additional
terms, representing the energy of interaction with the mirror (or
rather, with itself) require a knowledge of the motion of the particle
from the time t ŌłÆ T0 to t + T0 .
   Can we really talk about conservation, when the quantity con-
served depends on the path of the particles over considerable ranges
of time? If the force acting on a particle be F (t) say, so that the
particle satis’¼ües the equation of motion mx╠ł(t) = F (t), then it is
perfectly clear that the integral,
                            t
                    I(t) =      [mx╠ł(t) ŌłÆ F (t)]x╠ć(t)dt          (11)
                             ŌłÆŌł×

has zero derivative with respect to t, when the path of the particle
satis’¼ües the equation of motion. Many such quantities having the
same properties could easily be devised. We should not be inclined
to say (11) actually represents a quantity of interest, in spite of its
constancy.
12             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


    The conservation of a physical quantity is of considerable interest
because in solving problems it permits us to forget a great number
of details. The conservation of energy can be derived from the laws
of motion, but its value lies in the fact that by the use of it certain
broad aspects of a problem may be discussed, without going into
the great detail that is often required by a direct use of the laws of
motion.
    To compute the quantity I(t), of equation (11), for two di’¼Ćerent
times, t1 and t2 that are far apart, in order to compare I(t 1 ) with
I(t2 ), it is necessary to have detailed information of the path during
the entire interval t1 to t2 . The value of I is equally sensitive to the
character of the path for all times between t 1 and t2 , even if these
times lie very far apart. It is for this reason that the quantity I(t) is
of little interest. If, however, F were to depend on x(t) only, so that
it might be derived from a potential, (e.g.; F = ŌłÆV  (x)), then the
integrand is a perfect di’¼Ćerential, and may be integrated to become
1           2
2 m(x╠ć(t)) + V (x(t)). A comparison of I for two times, t 1 and t2 ,
now depends only on the motion in the neighborhood of these times,
all of the intermediate details being, so to speak, integrated out.
    We therefore require two things if a quantity I(t) is to attract
our attention as being dynamically important. The ’¼ürst is that it be
conserved, I(t1 ) = I(t2 ). The second is that I(t) should depend only
locally on the path. That is to say, if one changes the path at some
time t in a certain (arbitrary) way, the change which is made in I(t)
should decrease to zero as t gets further and further from t. That
is to say, we should like the condition ╬┤q╬┤I(t)   
                                              n (t )
                                                     ŌåÆ 0 as |t ŌłÆ t | ŌåÆ Ōł×
satis’¼üed.7




7   A more complete mathematical analysis than we include here is required to state
rigorously just how fast it must approach zero as |t ŌłÆ t | approaches in’¼ünity. The proofs
states herein are certainly valid if the quantities in (12) and (20) are assumed to become
and remain equal to zero for values of |t ŌłÆ t | greater than some ’¼ünite one, no matter
how large it may be.
              The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics             13


   The energy expression (10) satis’¼ües this criterion, as we have al-
ready pointed out. Under what circumstances can we derive an anal-
ogous constant of the motion for a general action function?
   We shall, in the ’¼ürst place, impose a condition on the equations of
motion which seems to be necessary in order that an integral of the
                                                        ╬┤A
motion of the required type exist. In the equation ╬┤q(t)      = 0, which
holds for an arbitrary time, t, we shall suppose that the in’¼éuence of
changing the path at time t becomes less and less as |tŌłÆt | approaches
in’¼ünity. That is to say, we require,
                      ╬┤2 A
                                ŌåÆ 0 as |t ŌłÆ T  | ŌåÆ Ōł× .                    (12)
                   ╬┤q(t)╬┤q(t )
    We next suppose that there exists a transformation (or rather, a
continuous group of transformation) of coordinates, which we sym-
bolize by qn ŌåÆ qn + xn (a) and which leaves the action invariant
(for example, the transformation may be a rotation). The trans-
formation is to contain a parameter, a, and is to be a continuous
function of a. For a equal to zero, the transformation should reduce
to the identity, so that xn (0) = 0. For very small a we may expand;
xn (a) = 0 + ayn + . . .. That is to say, for in’¼ünitesimal a, if the
coordinates qn are changed to qn + ayn the action is left unchanged;

                     A [qn (Žā)] = A [qn (Žā) + ayn (Žā)] .                   (13)

For example, if the form of the action is unchanged if the particles
take the same path at a later time, we may take, q n (t) ŌåÆ qn (t+a). In
this case, for small a, qn (t) ŌåÆ qn (t) + aq╠ćn (t) + . . . so that yn = q╠ćn (t).
   For each such continuous set of transformations there will be a
constant of the motion. If the action is invariant with respect to
change from q(t) to q(t + a), then an energy will exist. If the ac-
tion is invariant with respect to the translation of all the coordinates
(rectangular coordinates, that is) by the same distance, a, then a
momentum in the direction of the translation may be derived. For
rotations around an axis through the angle, the corresponding con-
stant of the motion is the angular momentum around that axis. We
14           FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


may show this connection between the groups of transformations and
the constants of the motion, in the following way: For small a, from
(13), we shall have,

                    A [qn (Žā)] = A [qn (Žā) + ayn (Žā)] .

Expanding the left side with respect to the change in the coordinate
ayn (Žā), according to (4) to the ’¼ürst order in a we have,

                                               Ōł×
                                              N
                                                                    ╬┤A
     A [qn (Žā) + ayn (Žā)] = A [qn (Žā)] + a                yn (t)           dt   (14)
                                             n=1 ŌłÆŌł×
                                                                   ╬┤qn (t)

and therefore, on account of (13),

                      N  Ōł×
                                         ╬┤A
                                yn (Žā)           dŽā = 0 .                       (15)
                                         ╬┤qn (Žā)
                      n=1 ŌłÆŌł×

     Now consider the quantity,

                              N  T
                                                  ╬┤A
                    I(T ) =              yn (Žā)           dŽā .                  (16)
                                                  ╬┤qn (Žā)
                              n=1 ŌłÆŌł×

On account of (15) we can also write,

                               N  Ōł×
                                                   ╬┤A
                   I(T ) = ŌłÆ              yn (Žā)           dŽā .                 (17)
                                                   ╬┤qn (Žā)
                               n=1 T

                                                                  )
Consider the derivative of I with respect to T ; dI(T          dT    =
               ╬┤A
   n yn (T ) ╬┤qn (T ) According to the equations of motion (7), this is
seen to vanish, so that I(T ) is independent of T for the real motion,
and is therefore conserved. We must now prove, in order that it be
acceptable as an important constant of the motion, that

               ╬┤I(T )
                       ŌåÆ 0 as |T ŌłÆ t| ŌåÆ Ōł×              for any m .              (18)
               ╬┤qm (t)
               The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                   15


                                          ╬┤I(T )
Suppose ’¼ürst that t > T . Let us compute ╬┤q m (t)
                                                  directly from equa-
tion (16), obtaining,
                         T 
             ╬┤I(T )              ╬┤yn (Žā) ╬┤A
                     =+                          dŽā
             ╬┤qm (t)      ŌłÆŌł× m ╬┤qm (t) ╬┤qm (Žā)
                                 T 
                                                        ╬┤2 A
                            +             yn (Žā)                  dŽā .           (19)
                                ŌłÆŌł× m               ╬┤qm (t)╬┤qm (Žā)

Now we shall suppose that yn (Žā) does not depend very much on
values of qm (t) for times, t, far away from Žā. That is to say we shall
assume,8
                        ╬┤yn (Žā)
                                ŌåÆ 0 as |Žā ŌłÆ t| ŌåÆ Ōł× .                             (20)
                        ╬┤qm (t)
In the ’¼ürst integral then, since t > T , and since only values of Žā less
than T appear in the integrand, for all such values, t ŌłÆ Žā > t ŌłÆ T . As
t ŌłÆ T approaches in’¼ünity, therefore, only terms in the ’¼ürst integral
of (19) for which t ŌłÆ Žā approaches in’¼ünity appear. We shall suppose
          n (Žā)
that ╬┤y╬┤qm (t) decreases su’¼āciently rapidly with increase in t ŌłÆ Žā that
the integral of it goes to zero as t ŌłÆ T becomes in’¼ünite. A similar
analysis applies to the second integral of (19). Here the quantity
     ╬┤2 A
╬┤qm (t)╬┤qm (Žā) approaches zero because of our assumption (12), and we
shall suppose this approach su’¼āciently rapid that the integral vanish
in the limit.
                                  ╬┤I(T )
    Thus we have shown that ╬┤q     m (t)
                                         ŌåÆ 0 as t ŌłÆ T ŌåÆ Ōł×. To prove
                                                                 ╬┤I(T )
the corresponding relation for T ŌłÆ t ŌåÆ Ōł× one may calculate ╬┤q      m (t)
with t < T from (17), and proceed in exactly the same manner. In
this way we can establish the required relation (18). This then shows
that I(T ) is an important quantity which is conserved.
   A particularly important example is, of course, the energy expres-
sion. This is got by the transformation of displacing the time, as has

8  In fact, for all practical cases which come to mind (energy momentum, angular mo-
                                                                        ╬┤y (Žā)
mentum, corresponding to time displacement, translation, and rotation), ╬┤q n (t) is ac-
                                                                          m
tually zero if Žā = t.
16          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


already been mentioned, for which y n (Žā) = q╠ćn (Žā). The energy inte-
gral may therefore be expressed, according to (16) (we have changed
the sign), as,
                              T 
                                 N
                                                    ╬┤A
                 E(T ) = ŌłÆ              q╠ćn (Žā)           dŽā .      (21)
                              ŌłÆŌł× n=1              ╬┤qm (Žā)

In our example (8) we would get from this formula,
                 T
      E(T ) = ŌłÆ      x╠ć(Žā)[ŌłÆmx╠ł(Žā) ŌłÆ V  (x(Žā)) ŌłÆ k 2 x╠ł(Žā + T0 )
                   ŌłÆŌł×

               ŌłÆ k 2 x╠ł(Žā ŌłÆ T0 )]dŽā ,                               (22)

from which (10) has been derived by direct integration.

4. Particles Interacting through an Intermediate Oscillator
The problem we are going to discuss in this section, since it will give
us a good example of a system for which only a principle of least
action exists, is the following: Let us suppose we have two particles
A and B which do not interact directly with each other, but there
is a harmonic oscillator, O with which both of the particles A and
B interact. The harmonic oscillator, therefore serves as an interme-
diary by means of which particle A is in’¼éuenced by the motion of
particle B and vice versa. In what way is this interaction through
the intermediate oscillator equivalent to a direct interaction between
the particles A and B, and can the motion of these particles, A, B,
be expressed by means of a principle of least action, not involving
the oscillator? (In the theory of electrodynamics this is the problem
as to whether the interaction of particles through the intermediary
of the ’¼üeld oscillators can also be expressed as a direct interaction at
a distance.)
    To make the problem precise, we let y(t) and z(t) represent co-
ordinates of the particles A and B at the time t. Let the La-
grangians of the particles alone be designated by L y and Lz . Let them
each interact with the oscillator (with coordinate x(t), Lagrangian
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics          17



2 (x╠ć ŌłÆ Žē x )) by means of a term in the Lagrangian for the entire
m 2      2 2

system, which is of the form (Iy + Iz )x, where Iy is a function in-
volving the coordinates of atom A only, and I z is some function of
the coordinates of B. (We have assumed the interaction linear in the
coordinate of the oscillator.)
   We then ask: If the action integral for y, z, x, is
                                                    
                           mx╠ć2 mŽē 2 x2
             Ly + L z +        ŌłÆ           + (Iy + Iz )x dt ,   (23)
                            2       2
is it possible to ’¼ünd an action A , a functional of y(t), z(t), only,
such that, as far as the motion of the particles A, B, are concerned,
(i.e., for variations of y(t), z(t)) the action A is a minimum?
    In the ’¼ürst place, since the actual motion of the particles A, B,
depends not only on y, z, initially (or at any other time) but also
on the initial conditions satis’¼üed by the oscillator, it is clear that A
is not determined absolutely, but the form that A takes must have
some dependence on the state of the oscillator.
    In the second place, since we are interested in an action princi-
ple for the particles, we must consider variations of the motion of
these particles from the true motion. That is, we must consider dy-
namically impossible paths for these particles. We thus meet a new
problem; when varying the motion of the particle A and B, what
do we do about the oscillator? We cannot keep the entire motion of
the oscillator ’¼üxed, for that would require having this entire motion
directly expressed in the action integral and we should be back where
we started, with the action (23).
    The answer to this question lies in the observation made above
that the action must involve somehow some of the properties of the
oscillator. In fact, since the oscillator has one degree of freedom it will
require two numbers (e.g. position and velocity) to specify the state
of the oscillator su’¼āciently accurately that the motion of the particles
A and B is uniquely determined. Therefore in the action function
for these particles, two parameters enter, which are arbitrary, and
represent some properties of the motion of the oscillator. When the
18             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


variation in the motion of the particles is taken, these quantities
must be considered as constants, and thus, it is the properties of the
oscillator described by these quantities which are considered ’¼üxed for
the ŌĆ£impossibleŌĆØ motion of the particles. We should not be surprised
to ’¼ünd that the action function for the particles depends on which
properties of the oscillator are considered to be held ’¼üxed in the
variation of y, and z. It is, on the other hand, somewhat unexpected
that, as we shall see, not all possible conditions on the oscillator give
rise to motions of y and z which are simply expressible in terms of
an action principle. Let us see how this works out in detail.
    We shall assume that the functions Iy and Iz are zero for times t
greater than T and less than 0. We shall also assume (for simplicity
only) that Iy is a function of t and y(t) only, and does not depend
on y╠ć(t). Similarly, Iz is to be independent of z╠ć(t). Then, from (23),
the equation of motion of particle y is,
                                       
                       d        ŌłéLy             ŌłéLy   ŌłéIy
                                            ŌłÆ       =     x(t) ,                 (24)
                       dt        Ōłé y╠ć            Ōłéy   Ōłéy

with a similar equation for z. That for the oscillator is,

                       mx╠ł + mŽē 2 x = [Iy (t) + Iz (t)] .                        (25)

The solution of this last equation is, where we have written ╬│ = I y +Iz

                                                       t
                                   sin Žēt    1
     x(t) = x(0) cos Žēt + x╠ć(0)           +                 ╬│(s) sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)ds . (26)
                                     Žē      mŽē         0


This may be expressed in other ways, for example,
                                          t              
                sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t)            1
         x(t) =                x(0) ŌłÆ         sin Žēs╬│(s)ds
                   sin ŽēT              mŽē 0
                                        T                   
                   sin Žēt            1
                +          x(T ) ŌłÆ          sin Žē(T ŌłÆ s)╬│(s)ds ,                 (27)
                  sin ŽēT            mŽē t
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics        19


or again,

                         1
             x(t) =          [RT sin Žēt + R0 sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t)]
                      sin ŽēT
                               t
                           1
                      +           sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)╬│(s)ds
                        2mŽē 0
                               T
                           1
                      ŌłÆ            sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)╬│(s)ds ,            (28)
                        2mŽē t

where we have written
                                                           
                    1                                sin ŽēT
             R0 =       x(0) + x(T ) cos ŽēT ŌłÆ x╠ć(T )               (29)
                    2                                   Žē

and
                                                       
                 1                               sin ŽēT
            RT =     x(T ) + x(0) cos ŽēT ŌłÆ x╠ć(0)          .        (30)
                 2                                  Žē

It is seen that RT is the mean of the coordinate of the oscillator at
time T and what that coordinate would have been at this time if the
oscillator had been free and started with its actual initial conditions.
Similarly, R0 is the mean of the initial coordinate and what that
coordinate would have had to be, were the oscillator free, to produce
the actual ’¼ünal conditions at time T . Outside the time range 0 to T
the oscillator is, of course, simply a free oscillator.
    These expressions for x(t) may be substituted into (24) and the
corresponding equation for z, to obtain various expressions for the
motion of the particles y, z; each expressed in terms of these particles
and two parameters connected with the oscillator. For the expression
(26) these parameters are x(0) and x╠ć(0); for (27) they are x(0) and
x(T ); for (28) they are R0 and RT . We should like to determine
whether these expressions could be obtained from an action for y
and z only.
20           FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


     If the action be A , then the expression (24) must be of the form
 ╬┤A
╬┤y(t) = 0. That is to say, we must have,

                                                       
               ╬┤A      d        ŌłéL           ŌłéL    ŌłéIy 
                    =ŌłÆ                     +       +        ┬Ę x(t) .   (31)
              ╬┤y(t)    dt       Ōłé y╠ć         Ōłéy t   Ōłéy t

We seek the solution of this expression for each expression we may
write for x(t).
    Now an equation such as (31) (which is really an in’¼ünite set
of equations, one for each value of t) does not always have
                                                           aso-
                                                       ╬┤    ╬┤A
lution. One of the necessary requirements is, since ╬┤y(s) ╬┤y(t)  =
          
  ╬┤    ╬┤A
╬┤y(t) ╬┤y(s) , that,

                                                   
            ╬┤       d ŌłéLy        ŌłéLy    ŌłéIy 
                  ŌłÆ            +        +        ┬Ę x(t)
          ╬┤y(s)     dt Ōłé y╠ć       Ōłéy t   Ōłéy t
                                                           
                   ╬┤       d ŌłéLy        ŌłéLy      ŌłéIy 
              =          ŌłÆ           +          +         ┬Ę x(s) .
                 ╬┤y(t)     ds Ōłé y╠ć       Ōłéy s     Ōłéy s

This requires, therefore, if s = t, that x(t) satisfy,
                                          
                       ŌłéIy  ╬┤x(t)   ŌłéIy  ╬┤x(s)
                                    =              .                   (32)
                       Ōłéy t ╬┤y(s)    Ōłéy s ╬┤y(t)

     For the expression (26), we have,
                                              
               ╬┤x(t)    1                ŌłéIy 
                     =    sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s) ┬Ę        if s < t
               ╬┤y(s)   mŽē                Ōłéy s
                                                                       (33)
                     = 0 if s > t .

With this expression equation (32) is not satis’¼üed so that we may
conclude that no simple action function will describe the motion
of the particles A and B if the initial position and velocity of the
oscillator are considered as ’¼üxed.
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         21


   On the other hand, since for the expression (27) we get,
                                              
           ╬┤x(t)     sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t) sin Žēs ŌłéIy 
                 =ŌłÆ                             if s < t
           ╬┤y(s)         mŽē sin ŽēT       Ōłéy s
                                              
                     sin Žē(T ŌłÆ s) sin Žēt ŌłéIy 
                 =ŌłÆ                             if s > t ,          (34)
                         mŽē sin ŽēT       Ōłéx s

we may conclude, since (34) satis’¼ües (32), that an action does exist
if the oscillator has a given initial and a given ’¼ünal position. In fact,
we may solve equation (31) with x(t) expressed as in (27) and obtain,
as an expression for the action,
         T                 T                                 
                                 sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t)x(0) + sin Žētx(T )
  A =       [Ly + Lz ]dt +                                         ╬│(t)dt
         0                   0                sin ŽēT
                       T  t
                1
        ŌłÆ                  dt    ds ┬Ę sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t) sin Žēs╬│(s)╬│(t) . (35)
           mŽē sin ŽēT 0         0

   The motion of the particles is given by this action principle by
requiring that it be a minimum for variations of y(t) and z(t), where
the quantities x(0) and x(T ) are considered as ’¼üxed constants (for
example, they might be zero).
   In the case that x(t) is given by the expression (28) with R 0 and
RT as constants, we ’¼ünd,
                                              
             ╬┤x(t)      1                ŌłéIy 
                    =       sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)          if s < t
             ╬┤y(s)     2mŽē               Ōłéy s
                                                                 (36)
                          1                ŌłéIy 
                    =ŌłÆ        sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)          if s > t ,
                        2mŽē                Ōłéy s

so that the relation (32) is satis’¼üed for this case also. The action
function for this case is,
      T                           T
                             1
A =       [Ly + Lz ]dt +              [RT sin Žēt + R0 sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t)]╬│(t)dt
       0                  sin ŽēT 0
               T t
           1
     +                 sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)╬│(t)╬│(s)dsdt .                    (37)
         2mŽē 0 0
22          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


This action is of particular interest inasmuch as in the special case
RT = R0 = 0 the integrand no longer depends on T , and the limits
of integration of 0 to T may be replaced without error by ŌłÆŌł× and
Ōł× so that we obtain an action of the special form,
         Ōł×                      Ōł× t
                             1
  A =        [Ly + Lz ]dt +               sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)]╬│(t)╬│(s)dsdt .
         ŌłÆŌł×                 2mŽē ŌłÆŌł× ŌłÆŌł×
                                                                  (38)

If, now, after having passed to the limit T = Ōł×, we assume that ╬│(t)
and Ly , Lz do not depend on t explicitly, the substitution y(t) ŌåÆ
y(t + a) and z(t) ŌåÆ z(t + a) does not alter the action function, so
that an energy expression exists for this action. (In electrodynamics
it leads to the half advanced plus half retard interaction used in the
action at a distance theory.)
    Exactly the same formulas result if it is that ╬│(t) depends on the
function y(t), as any general functional. The action of the particles
need not be the integral of a Lagrangian in the original form (23)
either. If there are more than one intermediate oscillator, and if the
oscillators are independent (i.e. if no two of the oscillators interact
directly) the expressions for the action, with the oscillators elimi-
nated are similar to (35), (37) and (38), except that there is a sum of
interaction terms, one for each oscillator. Thus, if the frequency of
the jth oscillator is Žēj , its mass mj , the interaction with the particles
given by ╬│j and there were N oscillators, (38), for example, would
read,
             Ōł×                    
                                   N               Ōł× t
                                           1
      A =         [Ly + Lz ]dt +                            sin Žēj (t ŌłÆ s)
             ŌłÆŌł×                          2mj Žēj   ŌłÆŌł×   ŌłÆŌł×
                                   j=1

            ├Ś ╬│j (t)╬│j (s)dsdt .                                             (39)

By compounding terms of the form (39) many di’¼Ćerent types of inter-
action may be obtained. For example, the interaction of equation (8)
would result from (39) if we had only one particle x, (instead of y and
z), and an in’¼ünite number of oscillators of unit mass ( ŽĆ4 Žē sin ŽēT dŽē
              The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics             23


oscillators with frequency Žē in the range Žē to Žē + dŽē), each inter-
acting with the particle through the function ╬│ j (t) = x╠ć(t) (the same
for each oscillator).
    If we look a little more closely at the type of interaction of (38) we
see that since ╬│(t) = Iy (t) + Iz (t) the interaction contains terms of
the form Iy (t)Iy (s) and Iz (t)Iz (s) as well as Iy (t)Iz (s) and Iz (t)Iy (s).
Although the latter represent interactions between the particles A
and B, the former type of term represents an interaction of particle
A with itself, and particle B with itself, so to speak. What type
of intermediate oscillator system will lead to interactions between
particles, and to no interaction of a particle with itself?
    This question is easily answered, when it is observed that if, in
expression (39) for example, we take two oscillators, j = 1, and
j = 2, so that Žē1 = Žē2 = Žē; m1 = ŌłÆm2 = m; ╬│1 = Iy + Iz ; and
╬│2 = Iy ŌłÆIz , since, ╬│1 (s)╬│1 (t)ŌłÆ╬│2 (s)╬│2 (t) = 2(Iy (s)Iz (t)+Iz (s)Iy (t)),
the interaction (39) could be written as,
                  Ōł×                        Ōł× t
                                        1
           A =         [Ly + Lz ]dt +                  sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)
                   ŌłÆŌł×                  mŽē ŌłÆŌł× ŌłÆŌł×
                 ├Ś [Iy (s)Iz (t) + Iz (s)Iy (t)]dsdt                       (40)

representing interactions of the particles with each other and having
no ŌĆ£self-actionŌĆØ terms. Exactly the same procedure leads to the same
results in the cases (35) and (37).
   The original action, involving the oscillators, which leads to a
form of this kind is, from what we have said,
                Ōł×
                     Ly + Lz + (Iz + Iy )x1 + (Iz ŌłÆ Iy )x2
                 ŌłÆŌł×
                                                    
                      m 2             m 2
                     + (x╠ć1 ŌłÆ Žē x1 ) ŌłÆ (x╠ć2 ŌłÆ Žē x2 ) dt .
                               2 2             2 2
                      z               2
This may be written, by putting ╬Ęz = x1 + x2 and ╬Ęy = x1 ŌłÆ x2 ,
       Ōł×                                                  
                                     m
            Ly + Lz + Iz ╬Ęz + Iy ╬Ęy + (╬Ę╠ćy ╬Ę╠ćz ŌłÆ Žē 2 ╬Ęy ╬Ęz ) dt .
       ŌłÆŌł×                            2
24          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


This may be immediately generalized to the case where there are a
number of particles yk . The action,
        ’Ż«                                                        ’Ż╣
     Ōł×                        m
        ’Ż░ (Lyk + Iyk ╬Ęyk ) +           (╬Ę╠ćyk ╬Ę╠ćyl ŌłÆ Žē 2 ╬Ęyk ╬Ęyl )’Ż╗ dt
     ŌłÆŌł×                              2
            k                     k   l=k

will lead to interactions only between pairs of particles k, l, no terms
arising corresponding to the action of a particle on itself.
    These action expressions will be of importance in the next part
of the paper when we discuss them quantum mechanically. Start-
ing with a system with a Hamiltonian, we have, at least classically,
found a corresponding non-Hamiltonian action principle, by leaving
out one member of the system. We have, in this, a way of checking a
description which is intended as a generalization of quantum mechan-
ics. We may start with a Hamiltonian system, where the quantum
mechanics is well known, and show that by suitable elimination of
the intermediate oscillator we get a system whose classical analogue
obeys an action principle of the type (35) or (37). We do this on
page 62.


III. Least Action in Quantum Mechanics

Classical mechanics is the limiting form of quantum mechanics when
PlanckŌĆÖs constant, , is considered as being vanishingly small. The
classical system analogous to a quantum mechanical system (when
such an analogue exists) may be mathematically exhibited most
directly by letting  approach zero in the quantum mechanical
equations.
   The inverse problem, that of determining a quantum mechani-
cal description of a system whose classical mechanical behaviour is
known, may not be so easily solved. Indeed, the solution cannot be
expected to be unique; witness, for example, the Klein-Gordon equa-
tion and DiracŌĆÖs equation for the relativistic behaviour of an electron,
               The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                    25


both of which have the same classical analogue and quite di’¼Ćerent
quantum mechanical consequences.
    There exist, however, very useful rules applicable when the clas-
sical equations may be put into Hamiltonian form, and conjugate
coordinates and momenta may be de’¼üned. These rules, leading to
Schro╠łdingerŌĆÖs equations, or HeisenbergŌĆÖs matrix formulation are too
well known to require description here.9
    For classical systems, such as those described in the ’¼ürst part
of this paper, which in general have no Hamiltonian form, and for
which conjugate momenta and coordinates cannot be de’¼üned, no
satisfactory method of quantization has been given. In fact, the usual
formulations of quantum mechanics use the concepts of Hamiltonian,
and of momentum in such a direct and fundamental way that it would
seem almost impossible to do without them.
    A formulation of quantum mechanics will be described here which
does not require the ideas of a Hamiltonian or momentum operator
for its expression. It has, as its central mathematical idea, the ana-
logue of the action integral of classical mechanics. It is a solution to
the problem of the quantization of the classical theory of least action
described in the ’¼ürst part of the paper.
    A generalization of quantum mechanics which is to apply to a
wider range of classical systems must satisfy at least two conditions.
First, in the limit as  approaches zero the quantum mechanical
equations must pass over into classical equations of motion applica-
ble to systems in this widened range. And, second, they must be
equivalent to the present formulations of quantum mechanics appli-
cable to classical systems with Hamiltonia. The form of quantum
mechanics to be described below does indeed satisfy both these cri-
teria for systems for which a principle of least action exists. As an
additional argument we shall show that the action principles arising



9  They are discussed very satisfactorily by Dirac in his book, ŌĆ£The Principles of Quan-
tum MechanicsŌĆØ (Oxford 1935) on page 88, and on page 119.
26             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


in classical theory from the elimination of an intermediate harmonic
oscillator arise in an analogous way in quantum mechanics.

1. The Lagrangian in Quantum Mechanics
A description of the proposed formulation of quantum mechanics
might best begin by recalling some remarks made by Dirac 10 con-
cerning the analogue of the Lagrangian and the action in quantum
mechanics. These remarks bear so directly on what is to follow and
are so necessary for an understanding of it, that it is thought best to
quote them in full, even though it results in a rather long quotation.
Speaking of the transformation function (q t |qT ) connecting the rep-
resentations referring to two di’¼Ćerent times t and T , he says, ŌĆ£From
the analogy between classical and quantum contact transformation
. . . we see that (qt |qT ) corresponds in the classical theory to eiS/
where S is HamiltonŌĆÖs principal function for the time interval T to
t, equal to the time-integral of the Lagrangian L,
                                       t
                                  S=      Ldt .                      (21 )
                                            T

                                                                 
Taking an in’¼ünitesimal time interval t to t + ╬┤t, we see that (q t+╬┤t |qt )
                      iL╬┤t
corresponds to e  . This result gives probably the most funda-
mental quantum analogue for the classical Lagrangian function. It is
preferable for the sake of analogy to consider the classical Lagrangian
as a function of the coordinates at time t and the coordinates at time
t+╬┤t, instead of a function of the coordinates and velocities at time t.
    There is an important action principle in classical mechanics con-
cerning HamiltonŌĆÖs principal function (21). It says that this function
remains stationary for small variations of the trajectory of the sys-
tem which do not alter the end points, i.e. for small variations of the
qŌĆÖs at all intermediate times between T and t with q T and qt ’¼üxed.
Let us see what it corresponds to in the quantum theory.

10 Dirac, ŌĆ£The Principles of Quantum MechanicsŌĆØ, p. 124ŌĆō126.

EditorŌĆÖs note: Very similar material is contained in the Third Edition (1947), p. 125ŌĆō130.
              The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                   27


   Put
                       tb
                  i                              i
           exp               Ldt    = exp          S(tb , ta )   = B(tb , ta )   (22 )
                      ta                        

so that B(tb , ta ) corresponds to (qt b |qt a ) in the quantum theory. Now
suppose the time interval T ŌåÆ t to be divided up into a large number
of small time intervals T ŌåÆ t1 , t1 ŌåÆ t2 , . . . , tmŌłÆ1 ŌåÆ tm , tm ŌåÆ t, by
the introduction of a sequence of intermediate times t 1 , t2 , . . . , tm .
Then

       B(t, T ) = B(t, tm )B(tm , tmŌłÆ1 ) . . . B(t2 , t1 )B(t1 , T ) .           (23 )

The corresponding quantum equation, which follows from the com-
position law . . . , is
                              
             
          (qt |qT ) =      . . . (qt |qm
                                            
                                          )dqm   
                                               (qm   
                                                   |qmŌłÆ1    
                                                         )dqmŌłÆ1 ...

                       ├Ś (q2 |q1 )dq1 (q1 |qT ) ,                           (24 )

qk being written for qt k for brevity. At ’¼ürst sight there does not
seem to be any close correspondence between (23) and (24). We
must, however, analyse the meaning of (23) rather more carefully.
We must regard each factor B as a function of the qŌĆÖs at the two
ends of the time interval to which it refers. This makes the right-
hand side of (23) a function, not only of q t and qT , but also of all
the intermediate qŌĆÖs. Equation (23) is valid only when we substi-
tute for the intermediate qŌĆÖs in its right-hand side their values for
the real trajectory, small variations in which leave S(t, T ) station-
ary and therefore also, from (22), leave B(t, T ) stationary. It is the
process of substituting these values for the intermediate qŌĆÖs which
corresponds to the integrations over all values for the intermediate
qŌĆÖs in (24). The quantum analogue of HamiltonŌĆÖs action principle
is thus absorbed in the composition law (24) and the classical re-
quirement that the values of the intermediate qŌĆÖs shall make S(t, T )
stationary corresponds to the condition in quantum mechanics that
28             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


all values of the intermediate qŌĆÖs are important in proportion to their
contribution to the integral in (24).
    Let us see how (23) can be a limiting case of (24) for  small. We
must suppose the integrand in (24) to be of the form e iF/, where F is
a function of qT , q1 , q2 . . . qm
                                      , q  which remains continuous as  tends
                                           t
to zero, so that the integrand is a rapidly oscillating function when
 is small. The integral of such a rapidly oscillating function will be
extremely small, except for the contribution arising from a region in
the domain of integration where comparatively large variations in the
qk produce only very small variations in F . Such a region must be the
neighborhood of a point where F is stationary for small variations
of the qk . Thus the integral in (24) is determined essentially by the
value of the integrand at a point where the integrand is stationary
for small variations of the intermediate q  ŌĆÖs, and so (24) goes over
into (23).ŌĆØ
    We may now point out that not only does (q t+╬┤t                  |qt ) correspond to
         q ŌłÆq                
exp 1 L t+╬┤t       t     
                      , qt+╬┤t      ╬┤t , where L(q╠ć, q) is the Lagrangian for the
               ╬┤t
classical system considered as a function of velocity and coordinate,
but that often it is actually equal to it, within a normalization con-
stant, in the limit as ╬┤t approaches zero. That is, to terms of order
       
╬┤t, if g(q) dq is the volume element in q-space
                                                             
                                         
         Žł(qt+╬┤t , t + ╬┤t) = (qt+╬┤t           |qt )Žł(qt , t) g(qt ) dqt
                                                    qt+╬┤t                                 ŌłÜ
                                                                                              g dqt
                                                           ŌłÆqt
                                                i╬┤t                  
                                    =       e    
                                                    L       ╬┤t
                                                                   ,qt+╬┤t
                                                                                Žł(qt , t)
                                                                                             A(╬┤t)
       
since qt+╬┤t and qt are just di’¼Ćerent variables it might be advantageous
to avoid the subscripts, and to write;11 (Q = qt+╬┤t   , q = qt )
                           QŌłÆq                       
                       i╬┤t
                           L        ,Q                  g(q)dq
                   e          ╬┤t        Žł(q, t)               = Žł(Q, t + ╬┤t)                          (41)
                                                        A(╬┤t)

                                    q   ŌłÆqt
                                                          q   ŌłÆqt
                                                                              
11 One could just as well write L t+╬┤t         , qt for L t+╬┤t          
                                                                      , qt+╬┤t   the di’¼Ćerence
                                        ╬┤t                     ╬┤t
being of a higher order of smallness than we are concerned with.
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         29


as ╬┤t ŌåÆ 0 to the ’¼ürst order in ╬┤t. This is an integral equation to
determine the wave function Žł(Q, t + ╬┤t) for the system at the time t
in terms of its value at time t. It therefore serves the same function as
Schro╠łdingerŌĆÖs equation, and indeed is equivalent to that equation if
the normalization constant, A(╬┤t), a function of ╬┤t is chosen suitably.
    To see how this comes about, we take the simplest case of a par-
ticle of mass m moving in one dimension in a force ’¼üeld of potential
V (x). Thus the classical Lagrangian function is L = 12 mx╠ć2 ŌłÆ V (x).
In accordance with equation (41), then the wave function for this
system must satisfy (where we have written ╬Ą for ╬┤t) for in’¼ünitesimal
╬Ą, the equation,
                            
                                 i╬Ą m xŌłÆy 2               dy
             Žł(x, t + ╬Ą) = e  { 2 ( ╬Ą ) ŌłÆV (x)} Žł(y, t) .           (42)
                                                          A
Let us substitute y = ╬Ę + x in the integral;
                                 2
                             i m╬Ę                     d╬Ę
           Žł(x, t + ╬Ą) = e  { 2╬Ą ŌłÆ╬ĄV (x)} Žł(x + ╬Ę, t) .            (43)
                                                      A
Only values of ╬Ę close to zero will contribute to the integral, be-
cause, for small ╬Ą, other values of ╬Ę make the exponential oscillate so
rapidly that there will arise little contribution to the integral. We are
therefore led to expand Žł(x + ╬Ę, t) in a Taylor series around ╬Ę = 0,
obtaining, after rearranging the integral,
                           i╬Ą                   
                       eŌłÆ  V (x)        i m 2
                                              ╬Ę                ŌłéŽł(x, t)
         Žł(x, t + ╬Ą) =                 e  2╬Ą      Žł(x, t) + ╬Ę
                            A                                    Ōłéx
                                                     
                          ╬Ę 2 Ōłé 2 Žł(x, t)
                       +                   +   . . .  d╬Ę .
                           2      Ōłéx2
             im 2
                          
        Ōł×
Now, ŌłÆŌł× e ┬Ę2╬Ą ╬Ę ┬Ę d╬Ę = 2ŽĆ╬Ąi   m (see Pierces integral tables 487), and
by di’¼Ćerentiating both sides with respect to m, one may show
                   Ōł×                         
                                im 2              2ŽĆ╬Ąi ╬Ąi
                       ╬Ę 2 ┬Ę e ┬Ę2╬Ą ╬Ę d╬Ę =                   .
                    ŌłÆŌł×                               m m
30             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


The integral with ╬Ę in the integrand is zero since it is the integral of
an odd function. Therefore,
                 
                     2ŽĆ╬Ąi
                      m    ŌłÆ i╬Ą V (x)     ╬Ąi Ōłé 2 Žł
Žł(x, t + ╬Ą) =              e           Žł(x, t) +   + terms in ╬Ą2 etc. .
                 A                         m 2x2
                                                                    (44)
The left hand side of this, for very small ╬Ą approaches Žł(x, t) so that
for the equality to hold we must choose,
                                           
                                               2ŽĆ╬Ąi
                                 A(╬Ą) =              .                             (45)
                                                m

Expanding both sides of (44) in powers of ╬Ą up to the ’¼ürst, we ’¼ünd,

                     ŌłéŽł(x, t)            i╬Ą              i╬Ą Ōłé 2 Žł
       Žł(x, t) + ╬Ą            = Žł(x, t) ŌłÆ V (x)Žł(x, t) +           ,
                       Ōłét                               2m Ōłéx2

and therefore,

                              ŌłéŽł    2 Ōłé 2 Žł
                         ŌłÆ        =ŌłÆ          + V (x)Žł
                             i Ōłét    2m Ōłéx2

which is just Schro╠łdingerŌĆÖs equation for the system in question.
    This con’¼ürms the remark that equation (41) is equivalent to
Schro╠łdingerŌĆÖs di’¼Ćerential equation for the wave function Žł. 12 Thus
given a classical system describable by a Lagrangian which is a func-
tion of velocities and coordinates only, a quantum mechanical de-
scription of an analogous system my be written down directly, with-
out ’¼ürst working out a Hamiltonian.


12 We have, of course only proved the equivalence in a very special case. It is apparent,

however, that the proof may be readily extended to any Lagrangian which is a quadratic
function of the velocities, in a addition to, perhaps, some terms linear in the velocity
arising from magnetic ’¼üelds. The equivalence will be shown in a more general manner
later.
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                                  31


    If the problem involves more than one particle, or particles with
more than one degree of freedom, equation (41) remains formally
the same, if q and Q are considered to represent entire sets of coor-
                 ŌłÜ
dinates, and       g dq represents the volume integral over the space
of these coordinates. The form of Schro╠łdingerŌĆÖs equation which will
be arrived at will be de’¼ünite and will not su’¼Ćer from the type of am-
biguity one ’¼ünds if one tries to substitute i Ōłéq    Ōłé
                                                       for pq in the classical
Hamiltonian.
    It will be important to consider the consequences of (41) when
applied to connect the wave function at one time to its value at some
’¼ünite later time.
    Suppose we know the wave function Žł(q 0 , t0 ) at time t0 , and desire
it at time T . Dividing the time interval up into a very large number
of small time intervals t0 to t1 , t1 to t2 , . . . , tm to T , and applying
relation (41) to each time interval we obtain, if we write q i for the
coordinate associated with time t i ,

                               q                                                  
                              i      i+1 ŌłÆqi                                           g(qi )dqi
                                L            ,q
                                    ti+1 ŌłÆti i+1
                                                       ┬Ę(ti+1 ŌłÆti )
  Žł(qi+1 , ti+1 ) Ōēā       e   
                                                                      ┬Ę Žł(qi , ti )               .
                                                                                    A(ti+1 ŌłÆ ti )
                                                                                                (46)
Thus, by induction we ’¼ünd the relation,

                                     m                                 
                                      i      qi+1 ŌłÆ qi
Žł(Q, T ) Ōł╝
         =        ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę         exp          L            , qi+1 ┬Ę (ti+1 ŌłÆ ti )
                                             ti+1 ŌłÆ ti
                                         i=0
                                       ŌłÜ      ŌłÜ                ŌłÜ
                                       g0 dq0 g1 dq1 , . . . , gn dqm
             ├Ś Žł(q0 , t0 )                                                     , (47)
                                A(t1 ŌłÆ t0 ) ┬Ę A(t2 ŌłÆ t1 ) ┬Ę . . . ┬Ę A(T ŌłÆ tm )

where in the sum we shall write Q for q m+1 , and T for tm+1 . In the
limit as we take ’¼üner and ’¼üner subdivisions of the interval t 0 to T
and thus make an ever increasing number of successive integrations,
the expression on the right side of (47) becomes equal to Žł(Q, T ).
                                        T
The sum in the exponential resembles t0 L(q╠ć, q)dt with the integral
written as a Riemann sum.
 32            FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


    In a similar manner we can compute Žł(q 0 , t0 ) in terms of the wave
 function at the later time T = tm+1 , by the equation;
                           
    Žł ŌłŚ (q0 , t0 ) =    ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Žł ŌłŚ (qm+1 , tm+1 )
                                m                                 
                               i      qi+1 ŌłÆ qi
                   ├Ś exp            L            , qi+1 ┬Ę (ti+1 ŌłÆ ti )
                                      ti+1 ŌłÆ ti
                                 i=0
                      ŌłÜ                   ŌłÜ
                        gm+1 dqm+1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę g1 dq1
                   ├Ś                                 .                     (48)
                     A(tm+1 ŌłÆ tm ) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę A(t1 ŌłÆ t0 )

 2. The Calculation of Matrix Elements in the
    Language of a Lagrangian
 Suppose we wish to compute the average value of some function f (q)
 of the coordinates, at the time t0 , which we shall call f (q0 );
                        
                                                         ŌłÜ
             f (q0 ) = Žł ŌłŚ (q0 , t0 )f (q0 )Žł(q0 , t0 ) g0 dq0 .   (49)

 Let us try to express this in terms of the wave function at some more
 future time, t = tm+1 , by equation (48), and in terms of the wave
 function Žł(qŌłÆm , tŌłÆm ) at some earlier time t = tŌłÆm by an equation
 analogous to (47) (we shall let negative indices stand for times earlier
 than t0 ). We obtain
             
f (q0 ) =    ┬Ę Žł ŌłŚ (qm+1 , tm+1 )
               m                                 
              i      qi+1 ŌłÆ qi
  ├Ś exp             L           , qi+1 ┬Ę (ti+1 ŌłÆ ti )         ┬Ę f (q0 )
                 
                      ti+1 ŌłÆ ti
               i=ŌłÆm
                         ŌłÜ               ŌłÜ      ŌłÜ              ŌłÜ
                          g dqm+1 . . . g dq0 g dqŌłÆ1 . . . gdqŌłÆm
  ┬ĘŽł(qŌłÆm , tŌłÆm ) ┬Ę                                                           .
                     A(tm+1 ŌłÆ tm ) . . . A(t0 ŌłÆ tŌłÆ1 ) . . . A(tŌłÆm +1 ŌłÆ tŌłÆm )
                                                                           (50)

 We shall be dealing with expressions of this form to a considerable
 extent, so that we shall make some remarks concerning it. In the
               The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                 33


’¼ürst place, we will always take tŌłÆm to be a ’¼üxed time T1 very far
in the past, and tm+1 to be T2 , a time very far in the future. Sec-
ondly, we may generalize somewhat by taking the wave function at
T2 arbitrarily, say Žć, and not necessarily the same as what the wave
function Žł chosen at time T1 would become at this later time T2 .
In this way we shall have an expression more like a matrix element
than an average. We shall use the symbol Žć|f (q 0 )|Žł to represent
this quantity. We shall continue to call it simply the average of f
even though it more closely resembles a matrix element. We may,
of course calculate quantities such as Žć|f (q 1 )|Žł, which correspond
to the average value of f (q) at the slightly later time, t 1 , merely by
replacing the f (q0 ) appearing in the integral on the right hand side
of (50) with f (q1 ). Thus, we may ’¼ünd the time rate of change of the
average value of f (q), as,
d                Žć|f (q1 )|Žł ŌłÆ Žć|f (q0 )|Žł       f (q1 ) ŌłÆ f (q0 )
   Žć|f (q)|Žł =                               = Žć|                   |Žł ,
dt                          t1 ŌłÆ t 0                     t1 ŌłÆ t 0
                                                                         (51)

where the last expression means that we are to replace f (q 0 ) in the
integral of (50) by f (q1t1)ŌłÆf
                            ŌłÆt0
                               (q0 )
                                     . We may say then, that the symbol
Žć| |Žł means that the quantity inside is to be multiplied by an
exponential of the form of equation (50), by a wave function Žć at
T2 , and one, Žł, at T1 , and integrated over all coordinates. Finally,
the limit as the subdivisions of time become ’¼üner and ’¼üner is to be
taken. We shall, for a while, disregard which wave functions are put
into the expression, and shall simply write, |f |, but we shall discuss
this later. In this way we can de’¼üne the average of F (q(Žā)] where
F is any functional13 at all of q(Žā). We need merely to express the
functional approximately as a function of the values, q i , of q at the
points ti , place this function in the integral of (50) and pass to the
limit.


13 Properties of functionals and our notation with regard to them is described in the

’¼ürst section (p. 7) of the paper.
34            FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


3. The Equations of Motion in Lagrangian Form
Let us now consider some functional, which, expressed in terms of q i ,
the values of q at the times ti is F (qi ), -      that is to say, a function of
                                                       ŌłÜ1 Ōłé(ŌłÜgn F ) 
. . . qŌłÆ1 , q0 , q1 , q2 . . . etc. Let us calculate  gn Ōłéqn  . Replacing
           ŌłÜ
          Ōłé gF
f by ŌłÜ1g Ōłéqk in (50) we see that we may integrate by parts with
respect to qk . The integrated part may be assumed to vanish, for if
we consider that the integrations over the other qŌĆÖs were performed
the remaining integrand would be similar to the square of the wave
function at time tk , which presumably vanishes at in’¼ünity. We ’¼ünd
after integrating by parts, an expression similar to (50) but having
a di’¼Ćerent form for f (q0 ); namely we ’¼ünd,
                           
     1      Ōłé( g(qk ) ┬Ę F ) 
    
                            
     g(qk )       Ōłéqk        
                      m                                         
          i       Ōłé              qi+1 ŌłÆ qi                           
      =ŌłÆ      F ┬Ę                L             , qi+1 ┬Ę (ti+1 ŌłÆ ti )  .
                 Ōłéqk          
                                    t i+1 ŌłÆ t i                         
                            i=ŌłÆm

                                                                              (52)

Thus performing the indicated di’¼Ćerentiation we obtain,
            ŌłÜ      
        1 Ōłé( gF ) 
       ŌłÜ            
        g Ōłéqk 
                                                               
            i          qk+1 ŌłÆ qk                   qk ŌłÆ qkŌłÆ1
          =      F Lq╠ć               , qk+1 ŌłÆ Lq╠ć              , qk
                       tk+1 ŌłÆ tk                   tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1
                                                  
                                  qk ŌłÆ qkŌłÆ1         
            ŌłÆ (tk ŌłÆ tk+1 ) ┬Ę Lq              , qk    ,               (53)
                                  tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1         

where we have written Lq╠ć for the function ŌłéL                    ŌłéL
                                               Ōłé q╠ć , and Lq for Ōłéq . The
expression in { } may be remembered most easily by noting that its
limit for in’¼ünitesimal subdivisions is
                                       
                          d ŌłéL         ŌłéL
                                    ŌłÆ       dt .
                         dt Ōłé q╠ć       Ōłéq
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics        35


   This relation (53) is fundamental in that, when compared to cor-
responding expressions in the usual form of quantum mechanics, it
contains, as we shall see, in one equation, both the equations of mo-
tion and the commutation rules for p and q. The way this comes
about can be seen most clearly by applying equation (53) to the
                               2                           ŌłÜ
simple example with L = m x╠ć2 ŌłÆ V (x). It then reads, ( g = 1)
                                     
        ŌłéF          
             = i F ┬Ę m xk+1 ŌłÆ xk
        Ōłéxk                  tk+1 ŌłÆ tk
                                                           
                         xk ŌłÆ xkŌłÆ1                           
                  ŌłÆm                  + (tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1 )V (xk )  . (54)
                                                     
                         tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1
If F = xk then (54) becomes;
                                                           
                i      xk+1 ŌłÆ xk                    xk ŌłÆ xkŌłÆ1
        |1| =     m                   xk ŌłÆ xk ┬Ę m
                       tk+1 ŌłÆ tk                    tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1
                                           
                                           
                + xk (tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1 )V  (xk ) .

In the limit of ’¼üne subdivision of the time, since as t k ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1 ŌåÆ 0 the
last term becomes unimportant, we can write, supposing as usual
that in all these equations the limit is to be taken,
                                            
                                                  
          m xk+1 ŌłÆ xk xk ŌłÆ xk m xk ŌłÆ xkŌłÆ1  =  |1| . (55)
             tk+1 ŌłÆ tk                tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1          i
This is equivalent to the statement, in the ordinary notation of quan-
tum mechanics, that the average value of pq ŌłÆ qp is equal to the
average value of i I. The order of the factors in the usual mechanics
here shows up as the order of the terms in time. (Exact relations by
which formulas of the notation of equation (55) can be translated into
relations in the more usual notation will be given in a later section
(page 40)).
    Again by equation (53) for F = xk+3 , say, we ’¼ünd,
                                           
                                                 
  xk+3 m xk+1 ŌłÆ xk ŌłÆ xk+3 m xk ŌłÆ xkŌłÆ1  = 0 in the limit.
            tk+1 ŌłÆ tk                tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1 
                                                                  (56)
36          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


Thus, the di’¼Ćerence of two successive momentum measurements
followed by a position measurement, multiplied and averaged, is in-
’¼ünitesimal since the two successive momentum measurements give
the same result ŌĆö but if the position measurement occurs between
the momentum measurements, in time, the results is no longer small,
the position measurement having disturbed the momentum between
the times the momentum was measured. (Of course, these quanti-
ties cannot actually be looked upon as averages of quantities in the
classical sense because of the i in the expressions.)
                                !        x ŌłÆxkŌłÆ1 "
    In Eq. (55) we may replace xk ┬Ę m tkk ŌłÆtkŌłÆ1     by its value a mo-
                    !         xk+1 ŌłÆxk "
ment later, namely, xk+1 ┬Ęm               without changing the value
                                     tk+1 ŌłÆtk
of the expression by a ’¼ünite amount. Thus (55) may be rearranged
to read,
                                       
                |(xk+1 ŌłÆ xk )2 | = ŌłÆ    (tk+1 ŌłÆ tk ) ┬Ę |1| .     (57)
                                      mi
This describes the well known fact that a wave packet spreads
parabolically in time from a point, and that although the average
value of the displacement of a particle in the time dt is vdt, where v
is the mean velocity, the mean value of the square of this displace-
ment is not of order dt2 , but only of order dt. We mention it here to
point out that although the form for average velocity, is, from equa-
           ! xk+1 ŌłÆxk "
tion (51),  tk+1       , the average kinetic energy, for example, must
                   ŌłÆtk
             ! m  xk+1 ŌłÆxk   x ŌłÆx   "                  !  x ŌłÆx 2 "
be written     2   tk+1 ŌłÆtk ┬Ę k kŌłÆ1  rather than  m k+1 k  .
                                 tk ŌłÆtkŌłÆ1                2   tk+1 ŌłÆtk
The latter is in’¼ünite.
   If, in (54), we had chosen for F the expression G 1 xk G2 , where
G1 is any function of the coordinates, x j , belonging to times tj later
than tk (tj > tk ), and G2 is any function of the coordinates belonging
to times earlier than tk , we would have found, in place of equation
(55), the relation,
                                                      
                   x    ŌłÆ x                   x   ŌłÆ x           
          G1 m                                              G2 
                     k+1     k                   k     kŌłÆ1
                                ┬Ę xk ŌłÆ xk ┬Ę m
                    tk+1 ŌłÆ tk                   tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1
                
            =     |G1 G2 | .                                          (58)
                i
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         37


This is equivalent to the usual relation among averages,
                                            
                   |G1 (pq ŌłÆ qp)G2 | =      |G1 G2 | .
                                            i
Since G1 and G2 are arbitrary functions of their coordinates, we
may think of equation (58) as equivalent to the operator equation
pq ŌłÆ qp = i .
   Replacing F simply by G1 G2 with G1 , G2 de’¼üned as before, equa-
tion (54) becomes after dividing through by (t k ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1 ) since the left
side is zero,
    ’Ż«  xk+1ŌłÆxk          
                               x ŌłÆxkŌłÆ1
                                                    ’Ż╣ 
                                                          
           m tk+1 ŌłÆtk ŌłÆ m tkk ŌłÆtkŌłÆ1                      
      G1 ’Ż░                              + V 
                                               (x   )’Ż╗ G   = 0 . (59)
                    tk ŌłÆ tkŌłÆ1
                                                  k     2 
                                                         

This is equivalent to the operator equation, in the usual notation of
quantum mechanics, which is the quantum analogue of NewtonŌĆÖs law
of motion, namely, mx╠ł + V  (x) = 0. This law and the commutation
rules are of course equivalent to the commutation rules and the rules
HF ŌłÆ F H = i F╠ć with H = 2m    1 2
                                  p + V (x) in the usual formulation.
Thus equations (58) and (59) state all that is needed to completely
solve the problem for this system, and hence equation (54), or its
generalization, equation (53), from which they can be derived is all
that is required.
    Even though we are going to extend this to problems for which
no Hamiltonian exists, it may still be of interest to describe the
Hamiltonian from our point of view, when one does exist. Let us
consider the average of any functional F (q i ). To calculate the rate of
change with the time of this quantity we may use a relation analogous
to (51). Another method is as follows; suppose the variables q i which
appear in F are limited to indices between the times t l and tl (l > l ).
That is to say, F is a functional of only the variables q lŌłÆ1 to ql +1 .
(In the limit as our subdivisions in time become in’¼ünite, l, l  may
become in’¼ünite, but we want tl and tl to remain bounded, so that
F covers only a ’¼ünite span of time). Now, if in our expression (50)
for the average value of F the values of the times t i for i between
38           FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


l and l were increased by a constant small amount ╬┤ it would be
equivalent to calculating our F at a time ╬┤ later, with, however,
the same wave functions kept ’¼üxed at ’¼üxed times, T 2 and T1 . This
will give us just |F | + ╬┤ dt   d
                                    |F | to the ’¼ürst order in ╬┤. Therefore,
dt |F | is the derivative with respect to ╬┤ of the quantity we get by so
 d

augmenting the time variables. To compute the indicated quantities
we look at equation (50) and notice that if all the times were altered
as indicated, the only change made in the formula would be to replace
tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1 by tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ ╬┤ and tl +1 ŌłÆ tl by tl +1 ŌłÆ tl + ╬┤. Doing this,
and taking the derivative with respect to ╬┤, we ’¼ünd,
                                                   
         d           i           ql ŌłÆ qlŌłÆ1               ql ŌłÆ qlŌłÆ1
            |F | =       L                     , q l ┬Ę
                      
                              q╠ć
         dt                        tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1               tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1
                                             
                          ql ŌłÆ qlŌłÆ1                   
                     ŌłÆL                  , ql + ╬▒(tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1 ) F
                           tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1                  i
                                                          
                                  ql +1 ŌłÆ ql                 ql +1 ŌłÆ ql
                     ŌłÆ F Lq╠ć                       , ql +1 ┬Ę
                                   tl +1 ŌłÆ tl                tl +1 ŌłÆ tl
                                                                          
                          ql +1 ŌłÆ ql                                     
                     ŌłÆL                    , ql +1 + ╬▒(tl +1 ŌłÆ tl )  , (60)
                           tl +1 ŌłÆ tl                     i
                  d
where ╬▒(╬┤t) = d(╬┤t)  ln A(╬┤t). Equation (60) only applies if F contains
only coordinates between ql and ql , and does not involve the time
                                                          ! "
explicitly. If F does involve the time a term li=l  ŌłéF    Ōłéti
                                                                  should be
added to the right side.
    We may compare (60) to the usual relation dt     d
                                                       F  = ki HF ŌłÆ HF 
and see that the analogue of H is the expression in the { } in this
equation. The terms i ╬▒(tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1 ) arise from the di’¼Ćerentiation of
the normalizing factor, A. They serve to keep the expression for H
’¼ünite in the limit of in’¼ünitesimal subdivision, in spite of the fact that
                                    ! q ŌłÆqlŌłÆ1 2 "
it may contain terms of the form  tll ŌłÆtlŌłÆ1        whose magnitude we
have already discussed. For example, in view of (57) for the simple
                2
Lagrangian m2x╠ć ŌłÆ V (x), it is seen that ╬▒ must be 2(tl ŌłÆt   1
                                                                     and that,
                                 ŌłÜ                             lŌłÆ1 )
therefore, A(tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1 ) = const. tl ŌłÆ tlŌłÆ1 , as we have already found
for this case (Eq. (45)).
              The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics               39


4. Translation to the Ordinary Notation of
   Quantum Mechanics
What we have been doing so far is no more than to reexpress ordi-
nary quantum mechanics in a somewhat di’¼Ćerent language. In the
next few pages we shall require this altered language in order to de-
scribe the generalization we are to make to systems without a simple
Lagrangian function of coordinates and velocities. Before we do this,
it is perhaps worth while to show how the relations we have derived
up to this point, for systems possessing a Hamiltonian, H say, may
be most readily translated into the more usual notation.
    The usual expression for the wave function at time t 2 in terms of
the wave function at time t1 is given by means of the relation,
                                        i
                            Žłt2 = e  H(t2 ŌłÆt1 ) Žłt1 .                       (61)

Thus the matrix element between a state which, at time T 2 , possesses
the wave function Žć, and the state represented at time T 1 by the wave
function Žł, of an operator F considered acting at the time t 0 is
                 
                       i                i
                   Žć╠äe  H(T2 ŌłÆt0 ) F e  (t0 ŌłÆT1 )H Žłd Vol .     (62)

Thus, for example, the average coordinate at time t 0 between these
states, which is what we have been calling Žć|q 0 |Žł is expressible as
                           
                                   i              i
             Žć|q0 |Žł =        Žć╠äe  (T2 ŌłÆt0 )H qe  (t0 ŌłÆT1 )H Žłd Vol .    (63)

Similarly, Žć|q1 |Žł is the matrix element of the operator
   i               i
e+  (T2 ŌłÆt1 )H qe  H(t1 ŌłÆT1 ) , so that as t1 ŌłÆ t0 ŌåÆ 0 the quantity,
                                             #                                   $
                                              q ŌłÆ e
                                                     i
                                                       (t ŌłÆt0 )H ŌłÆ i (t1 ŌłÆt0 )H
                                                      1        qe
         q1 ŌłÆ q0                   i
     Žć|          |Žł = Žć╠äe  H(T2 ŌłÆt1 )
         t1 ŌłÆ t 0                                          t1 ŌłÆ t 0
                            i
                        ├Ś e  (t1 ŌłÆT1 )H Žłd Vol
40                FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


                       i                                        i
becomes Žć╠äe+  H(T2 ŌłÆt1 ) ┬Ę i (Hq ŌłÆ qH)e  H(t1 ŌłÆT1 ) Žłd Vol, and is there-
fore the average value of the operator i (Hq ŌłÆ qH), and represents
velocity, as we have said. Other functional expressions can be made
to correspond to operators. For example, if t m > tl ,
                       
                                   i                    i            i
 Žć|qm ql2 |Žł =                Žć╠äe  H(T2 ŌłÆtm ) qe  H(tm ŌłÆtl ) q 2 e  H(tl ŌłÆT1 ) Žłd Vol      (64)


while if tm < tl it is given by
                            
                                       i                    i         i
     Žć|qm ql2 |Žł =             Žć╠äe  H(T2 ŌłÆtl ) q 2 e  H(tl ŌłÆtm ) qe  H(tm ŌłÆT1 ) Žłd Vol .
                                                           (65)
   For example, equation (55) when translated becomes, if H =
 1 2
2m p + V (x),

 
          i                 mi                            i
      Žć╠äe  H(T2 ŌłÆtk ) ┬Ę       {(Hx ŌłÆ xH)x ŌłÆ x(Hx ŌłÆ xH)}e  H(tk ŌłÆT1 ) Žłd Vol
                            
              
                       i
        =          Žć╠äe  H(T2 ŌłÆT1 ) Žłd Vol
          i

which, of course, is correct. The left side of equation (56) when
translated with the aid of equations (64) and (65) does indeed vanish
in the limit as the division of time into intervals becomes ’¼üner and
’¼üner.
    As a further example we may mention the equivalence between
|x╠ć(t) ┬Ę f (x(t))| and the average of

                                                                  
                       i
                         H(T2 ŌłÆt)               1                     i
                   e                             (pf (x) + f (x)p) e  H(tŌłÆT1 )                (66)
                                               2m

as may be seen most easily by considering the average of
xi+1 ŌłÆxiŌłÆ1
 ti+1 ŌłÆtiŌłÆ1 f (xi ) according to obvious generalizations of equations (64)
and (65).
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         41


5. The Generalization to any Action Function
We now make the generalization to the case when the classical action
need not be of the form A = L(q╠ć, q)dt, but is some other more
general functional of q(Žā). In equation (50), as has already been
remarked, the phase of the exponential is just i L(q╠ć, q)dt written
as a Riemann sum due to our subdivision of the time into ’¼ünite,
but small, intervals. The obvious suggestion is, then, to replace this
exponent by i times the more general action. The action must of
course ’¼ürst be expressed in an approximate way in terms of q i , ti , in
such a way that as the subdivision becomes ’¼üner and ’¼üner it more
nearly approaches the action expressed as a functional of q(t).
   In order to get a clearer idea of what this will lead to, let us choose
a simple action function to keep in mind, for which no Hamiltonian
exists. We may take,
             Ōł×
                    mx╠ć(t)2
      A =                   ŌłÆ V (x(t)) + k 2 x╠ć(t)x╠ć(t + T0 ) dt     (67)
             ŌłÆŌł×       2

which is an approximate action function for a particle in a potential
V (x) and which also interacts with itself in a mirror, by means of
half advanced and half retarded waves, exactly as in (8).
    In the expression of equation (50) the integral of L extends only
over a ’¼ünite time range T1 to T2 . Our action (67) is meaningless for
a ’¼ünite time range. In fact if we were to integrate over the range
from T1 to T2 the action might still depend on values of x(t) outside
this range.
    This di’¼āculty may be circumvented by altering our mechanical
problem. We may assume that at a certain very large positive time
T2 , and at a large negative time T1 , all of the interactions (e.g., the
charges) have gone to zero and the particles are just a set of free
particles (or at least their motion is describable by a Lagrangian).
We may then put wave functions, Žć and Žł, for these times, when
the particles are free, into (50). (We might then suppose that the
42            FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


motion in the actual problem may be a limit of the motion as these
times T1 and T2 move out to in’¼ünity). We therefore compute, by
analogy to (50) the quantity

             
                                       i
Žć|F |Žł =       ŽćŌłŚ (qT ) exp            A (qT . . . q2 , q1 , q0 , qŌłÆ1 , . . . qT )
                       2                     2                                   1

                                                       ŌłÜ               ŌłÜ
                                                          gdqT . . . gdqT
             ┬Ę F (. . . q1 , q0 . . .) ┬Ę Žł(qT )                  2                1
                                                                                       . (68)
                                             1 A(T ŌłÆ t ) . . . A(t
                                                      2      m              ŌłÆm ŌłÆ T1 )


    In the limit as  ŌåÆ 0 this will lead to the classical action principle,
╬┤A = 0, in the way outlined by Dirac (see page 27) since nothing is
altered to invalidate that argument.
    We may obtain the fundamental relation of our quantum mechan-
ics, analogous to ŌłÜ equation (52), by integrating the formula for the
                Ōłé( gF )
average of ŌłÜ1g Ōłéqk by parts, to obtain,

                        
                   1  Ōłé( g(qk )F )        i       ŌłéA
          Žć|                     |Žł = ŌłÆ Žć|F ┬Ę     |Žł .                           (69)
               g(qk )    Ōłéqk                     Ōłéqk

As we have remarked above, this contains the analogue of the equa-
tions of motion as well as the quantum commutation rules.

6. Conservation of Energy. Constants of the Motion
Because of the importance in ordinary quantum mechanics of op-
erators which correspond to classical constants of motion, we shall
mention brie’¼éy the analogue of these operators in our generalized
formulation. Since these are not needed for the remainder of the
paper, they have not been studied in detail.
   The notation will be as in the classical case described in section
3, of the ’¼ürst part of the paper. The general discussion given there
applies equally well in this case, so that we shall not repeat it. We
will suppose, for simplicity that there is only one coordinate, q(Žā),
instead of the N coordinates qn (Žā).
                 The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                           43


    From the equations of motion (69) we can verify directly that,

                          i =t╠ä2 
                         t                     ŌłÜ              
                                      ŌłéA    1 Ōłé gi       Ōłéyi
               Žć|F ┬Ę              yi     + ŌłÜ       yi +         |Žł
                                      Ōłéqi  i gi Ōłéqi      i Ōłéqi
                         ti =t╠ä1


                            
                             i 2     t =t╠ä
                                    ŌłéF
                     = ŌłÆ Žć|     yi     |Žł .                                              (70)
                        i           Ōłéqi
                                     ti =t╠ä1

If t╠ä1 and t╠ä2 are far apart, we can suppose that, as we have proved in
the classical case, if the action is invariant with respect to the trans-
formation q ŌåÆ q + ay, the expression on the left of (70) multiplying
F , can be expressed as a di’¼Ćerence It╠ä1 ŌłÆ It╠ä2 , where the functional It╠ä2
involves the coordinates in the neighbourhood of t╠ä2 and It╠ä1 involves,
in the same way, coordinates for times in the neighbourhood of t╠ä1 .
     If the expression, F , involves coordinates for only a ’¼ünite range
around some time, t╠ä0 , and t╠ä1 and t╠ä2 are outside this range (t╠ä2 >
t╠ä0 > t╠ä1 ) then the right side is independent of t╠ä1 and t╠ä2 . This is the
analogue of the fact that I is a constant of the motion. In this case
also, the left side becomes analogous to the quantity IF ŌłÆ F I, and
the right side is just a di’¼Ćerential operation performed on F . The
di’¼Ćerential operation is characteristic of the group of transformations
from which I is derived.
     Thus, for a displacement in the x direction, the di’¼Ćerential oper-
           Ōłé
ator is Ōłéx   , the corresponding constant of the motion is momentum
in the x direction, as we have the analogue of the operator equation
px F ŌłÆ F px = i ŌłéX    ŌłéF
                            . More accurately, we have the analogue of the
                i                    i                      i                    i
                  H(t╠ä2 ŌłÆt╠ä0 )
equation, e                   px eŌłÆ  H(t╠ä2 ŌłÆt╠ä0 ) F ŌłÆ F e  H(t╠ä0 ŌłÆt╠ä1 ) px eŌłÆ  H(t╠ä0 ŌłÆt╠ä1 ) =
  ŌłéF
 i ŌłéX for all t╠ä1 and t╠ä2 . For the time-displacement the di’¼Ćerential
operator is dt  d
                   ŌłÆ ŌłétŌłé
                           and the constant is the negative of the energy, so
that we have the analogue of HF ŌłÆ F H = i dF                                ŌłéF
                                                                  dt ŌłÆ i Ōłét . If F does
not depend explicitly on the time, we can write the right side in the
usual way, as i F╠ć .
     For the energy expression, classically y(Žā) = q╠ć(Žā). The formula
(60) can be deduced from (70) most simply by writing for y i the
44          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory

             % i+1 ŌłÆqi    qi ŌłÆqiŌłÆ1 &
form, yi = 12 qti+1 ŌłÆti + ti ŌłÆtiŌłÆ1 in the case that the coordinates are
rectangular. The method described in connection with (60) (page
39) of augmenting all the times between t╠ä1 and t╠ä2 by a ’¼üxed amount
╬┤ may be applied here also to obtain an alternative expression for
the energy.

7. The Role of the Wave Function
The problem discussed in this section is that of the existence of a
wave function for times between T1 and T2 .
    It is to be noted, that in view of the relation (68) it is no longer
possible to express the formula for the averages in some such simple
form as ŽåŌłŚ2 F Žå1 d Vol. Suppose that F is especially simple so that
it contains only the coordinate q 0 itself. (For example, perhaps we
want to compute the average value of q 0 .) According to Eq. (68), it
may be expressed in the form,
                         
                                         ŌłÜ
                            Žü(q0 )F (q0 ) g0 dq0 ,                  (71)

where Žü(q0 ) is the result of integrating the integrand of (68) with
respect to every variable qi except q0 . This is to be compared to the
usual expression when a Hamiltonian exists,
                    
                                               ŌłÜ
                       ŽåŌłŚ2 (q0 )F (q0 )Žå1 (q0 ) g0 dq0 .          (72)

They would be equivalent if Žü(q 0 ) could be expressed as the product
of two functions ŽåŌłŚ2 (q0 ) and Žå1 (q0 ) in a natural and useful way. In
general, however the integral of exp i A over all the variables except
q0 cannot be so expressed. For the particular case that A is the
integral of an ordinary Lagrangian function of velocity and position,
the exponential can be broken up into two factors;
                                                                  
           i      q0 ŌłÆ qŌłÆ1                           qŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ qŌłÆ2
      exp     L             , q0 ┬Ę (t0 ŌłÆ tŌłÆ1 ) + L             , qŌłÆ1
                  t0 ŌłÆ t 1                          tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ tŌłÆ2

            ┬Ę (tŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ tŌłÆ2 ) + . . .
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics           45


and,                                                                   (73)
                                                                
                i   q1 ŌłÆ q0                        q2 ŌłÆ q1
          exp     L          , q1 ┬Ę (t1 ŌłÆ t0 ) + L          , q2
                   t1 ŌłÆ t 0                       t2 ŌłÆ t 1

                  ┬Ę (t2 ŌłÆ t1 ) + . . .       .

These factors contain only the variable q 0 in common, so that when
the integrations on the other variables are performed in expression
(68), the result remains factorable. The quantity Žå 1 (q0 ) is the result
of integrating the ’¼ürst factor, and is expressed in a form exactly
similar to (47). The quantity ŽåŌłŚ2 (q0 ) is expressed in terms of ŽćŌłŚ
by an equation like one obtains from (47) by taking the complex
conjugate (i.e., (48)).
    We can take the viewpoint, then, that the wave function is just
a mathematical construction, useful under certain particular con-
ditions to analyze the problem presented by the more generalized
quantum mechanical equations (68) and (69), but not generally ap-
plicable. It is not unreasonable that it should be impossible to ’¼ünd
a quantity like a wave function, which has the property of describing
the state of the system at one moment, and from which the state at
other moments may be derived. In the more complicated mechani-
cal systems (e.g., the example, (67)) the state of motion of a system
at a particular time is not enough to determine in a simple manner
the way that the system will change in time. It is also necessary to
know the behaviour of the system at other times; information which
a wave function is not designed to furnish. An interesting, and at
present unsolved, question is whether there exists a quantity analo-
gous to a wave function for these more general systems, and which
reduces to the ordinary wave function in the case that the action is
the integral of a Lagrangian. That such exist is, of course, not at
all necessary. Quantum mechanics can be worked entirely without a
wave function, by speaking of matrices and expectation values only.
In practice, however, the wave function is a great convenience, and
dominates most of our thought in quantum mechanics. For this rea-
46           FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


son we shall ’¼ünd it especially convenient, in interpreting the physical
meaning of the theory, to assume our mechanical systems is such
that, no matter how complex between the time T 1 and T2 , outside
of this range the action is the integral of a Lagrangian. In this way
we may speak of the state of the system at times T 1 and T2 , at least,
and represent it by a wave function. This will enable us to describe
the meaning of the new generalization in terms with which we are
already familiar. This we do in the next section.

8. Transition Probabilities
We shall suppose, as suggested above, that our action has the form
of the integral of a Lagrangian for times T 2 or later, and for times
T1 or earlier, but that it is arbitrary in between. In this way, we
may speak of the state of the system at time T 1 as being given by
a wave function Žł, and of the state of the system at time T 2 , by a
wave function Žć. We can then make the physical assumption that
the probability that the system in state Žł at time T 1 will be found,
at the time T2 , in the state Žć is the square of the absolute value of
the quantity Žć|1|Žł. The quantity may be de’¼üned by the expression
(68) with F replaced simply by unity.
   We can de’¼üne other physical quantities in terms of this, by de-
termining the changes in this probability, or rather in the quantity
Žć|1|Žł, produced by perturbations of the motion.
   We shall indicate by a subscipt the action for which the quantity
Žć|1|Žł is calculated, by writing Žć|1|Žł A if the action is A . Suppose
the action is slightly altered (in the interval T 1 to T2 ) to become
A +╬ĄF where ╬Ą is a very small parameter. From the form of equation
(68) we would have,
                                            i╬Ą
                     Žć|1|ŽłA +╬ĄF = Žć|e  F |ŽłA                  (74)

so that if ╬Ą is small enough to insure convergence, we may write,
                                 i╬Ą             ╬Ą2
     Žć|1|ŽłA +╬ĄF = Žć|1|ŽłA +      Žć|F |ŽłA ŌłÆ 2 Žć|F 2 |ŽłA = . . .
                                              2
                                                                 (75)
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         47


We    can   therefore   interprete Žć|F |ŽłA by saying it is
 d
i d╬Ą (Žć|1|ŽłA +╬ĄF ) at ╬Ą = 0. It should be emphasized here that
Žć|F G |ŽłA where F and G are any two functionals cannot in
general be written in a way analogous to a matrix product (e.g.,
  m Žć|F |Žåm Žåm |G |Žł) as can be done in the usual mechanics.
(This is because F and G may overlap in time, and so neither be
before the other.) The term Žć|F G |ŽłA may either be interpreted
as Žć|F |ŽłA with F replaced by F G , or alternatively, as the ’¼ürst
order change in Žć|F |ŽłA on changing A to A + ╬ĄF (see equation
(76)).
   We have, incidently, derived a perturbation equation (75), which
may be easily generalized (change A to A + ╬│G in (74), di’¼Ćerentiate
both sides with respect to ╬│, and set ╬│ = 0) to read,
                               i╬Ą                  ╬Ą2
Žć|G |ŽłA +╬ĄG = Žć|G |ŽłA +       Žć|F G |ŽłA ŌłÆ 2 Žć|F 2 G |ŽłA + . . .
                                                 2
                                                                     (76)
This permits us to express the average of a functional for one ac-
tion function in terms of averages of other functionals for a slightly
di’¼Ćerent action. For some particular problems, such as, for exam-
ple, the electrodynamic one, it may turn out that the action may be
considered as the sum of two terms, A0 + A1 , the ’¼ürst expressible
as the integral of a Lagrangian, while the second, not so express-
ible, may be considered as a small perturbation. Equation (76) then
permits the actual matrix elements to be expressed in terms of the
matrix elements with the Lagrangian action, A 0 , alone. Since for
this action, A0 , the problem is comparatively simple because wave
functions can be de’¼üned, the relation (76) will serve as a practical
method for solving problems in these cases.
    Perturbations may also be considered as producing transitions.
Suppose the state of the system at the early time T 1 was Žł. Let
us choose some state Žć, at the time T2 , and ask for the probability,
with the perturbed action A + ╬ĄF , that the system will be found
in this state at this time. It is just |Žć|Žł A +╬ĄF |2 . We shall further
suppose that Žć is so chosen that were it not for the perturbation,
╬ĄF , the system would have no chance of being found in the state Žć;
48           FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


that is, Žć|1|ŽłA = 0. Therefore from equation (75), to the order ╬Ą 2
the probability that the system originally in state Žł, is found in the
state Žć at that time T2 , due to the perturbation ŌĆö i.e., the transition
probability is just,
                             1             2
                                  Žć|╬ĄF |ŽłA  .                           (77)
                             2

   For the special case of a simple perturbing potential acting for a
                                  T
time 0 to T , we have ╬ĄF = ŌłÆ 0 V dt, so that our transition prob-
ability becomes the more usual expression (Compare, Dirac, ŌĆ£The
Principles of Quantum MechanicsŌĆØ, p. 177, (Eq. (20))
                             T             2
                        1                  
                                              .
                            Žć|    V dt|Žł
                       2                   
                                           A
                                0

    It is of interest to notice that if we are given that the wave function
at time T1 is ŽłT1 , although we cannot trace the behaviour of the
function through the interval T1 to T2 we can, nevertheless, answer
the question, ŌĆ£What will the wave function be at the time T 2 , and
later times?ŌĆØ (Of course, if we know the wave function at the time T 2
we can ’¼ünd it later, since it satis’¼ües a Shro╠łdinger equation from that
time on.) If we call the wave function at time T 2 , ŽłT2 , and expand it
in terms of a complete set of orthonormal wave functions Žć n at that
time, say ŽłT2 = an Žćn , the coe’¼ācients an will be just Žćn |1|ŽłT1 A .
Therefore, we have,
                                 
                         ŽłT2 =      Žćn Žćn |1|ŽłT1 A .
                                 n

On account of the form (68) for calculating Žć n |1|ŽłT1 A we ’¼ünd that
this may also be expressed as,
                 
                           i
      ŽłT2 (Q) = exp           A (Q, qmŌłÆ1 , . . . , q0 , qŌłÆ1 , . . . , qT1 )
                           
                              ŌłÜ              ŌłÜ
                                gdqmŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę gdqT1
                 ŽłT1 (qT1 ) ┬Ę                                               (78)
                                  A┬Ę┬Ę┬ĘA┬Ę┬Ę┬ĘA
in the limit when the subdivisions in time become in’¼ünitely ’¼üne,
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics        49


where A (Q ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę qT1 ) is that part of the action functional applicable
for times from T1 to T2 (compare (47)).

9. Expectation Values for Observables
The physical interpretation which is given in the above section, al-
though the only consistent one available, is rather unsatisfactory.
This is because the interpretation requires the concept of states rep-
resentable by a wave function, while we have pointed out that such
a representation is in general impossible. We are therefore forced to
alter our mechanical problem so that the action has a simple form at
large future and past times, so that we may speak of a wave function
at these times, at least. This di’¼āculty also ’¼ünds itself re’¼éected in the
mathematical formulation of the operations performed in calculating
average values from the equation (68). We have not de’¼üned precisely
what is to be done when the action does not become simple at times
far from the present.
    One possibility that suggests itself is to devise some sort of lim-
iting process so that the interpretation of the last section could be
used, and the limit taken as T1 ŌåÆ ŌłÆŌł× and T2 ŌåÆ +Ōł×. The au-
thor has made several attempts in this direction but they all appear
arti’¼ücial, having mathematical, rather than physical, content.
    An alternative possibility is to avoid the mention of wave func-
tions altogether, and use, as the fundamental physical concept, the
expectation value of a quantity, rather than a transition probabil-
ity. The work done in this connection, which is presented in this
section, is admittedly very incomplete and the results tentative. It
is included because many of the formulas derived would seem to be
of value, and the author believes that the solution to the problem of
physical interpretation will lie somewhere in this direction.
    In ordinary quantum mechanics the matrix element of an operator
A, between two states Žłm and Žłn , is given by,
                                
                                     ŌłŚ
                       Amn =        Žłm AŽłn d Vol .
50          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


The expected value for the quantity represented by the operator
A, for the state represented by the wave function Žł n is, Ann =
   ŽłnŌłŚ AŽłn d Vol. In an exactly similar way, we have used our de’¼ünition
(68) for a matrix element of a functional F between the state whose
wave function at the time T2 is Žć, and state whose wave function at
the time T1 is Žł. To compute the expected value of the functional
whose wave function at the time T1 is ŽłT1 , we calculate ŽłT2 |F |ŽłT1 ,
where ŽłT2 is given in terms of ŽłT1 by the equation (78).
    Another important quantity in quantum mechanics is the trace of
a matrix,14 Tr[A] = all n Ann . It measures the relative (unnormal-
ized) average expected value when a priori each state Žł n is consid-
ered as equally likely. We shall speak of it simply is the expectation
of A.
    Let us suppose A is an operator which has only certain particular
eigenvalues an , so that AŽćn = an Žćn , for some set of function Žćn . Let
us also suppose Fan (x) is a function of x which is zero unless x = a n ,
and Fan (an ) = 1. Then let us ’¼ünd the trace, Tr[BFan (A)]. (Fan (A)
is a projection operator). The matrix B ┬Ę Fan (A) has for its k, l
element, in a representation with the functions Žć n , [BFan (A)]kl =
   m Bkm [Fan (A)]ml . But, since A is diagonal in this representation,
[Fan (A)]ml = 0 if m = l, and equals Fan (am ) otherwise. Therefore
[B ┬Ę Fan (A)]kl = Bkl Fan (al ). Now, Fam (al ) = 0, unless l = m so that
we ’¼ünd, Tr[BFam (A)] = Bmm . That is to say, the trace of BFam (A)
is the expected value of B for the state for which the quantity A has
the value am .
    In a like manner it is not hard to show that, Tr[F bn (B) ┬Ę Fam (A)]
is equal to the probability that the quantity B will be found to have
the value bn in a state where it is known that A has the value a m
(neglecting degeneracies).
    These examples are given to remind the reader of the fact that by
means of the concept of trace all of the important physical concepts

14 See J. von Neumann, ŌĆ£Mathematische Grundlage der QuantenmechanikŌĆØ (1932),

p. 93, ’¼Ć.
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics              51


can be derived. What corresponds to taking a trace in our form of
quantum mechanics?
   As we can see from equations (68) and (78) the expression for
ŽłT2 |F |ŽłT1  can be written in the form, Žü(q, q  )ŽłTŌłŚ 1 (q)ŽłT1 (q  )dqdq 
where Žü(q, q  ) is given by a complicated expression obtained by substi-
tuting (78) into (68). That is to say, what corresponds to the diagonal
element Ann may be written in our case as Žü(q, q  )ŽłnŌłŚ (q)Žłn (q  )dqdq  .
The sum of the diagonal elements, and therefore the trace, corre-
sponds to
                       
                             Žü(q, q  )ŽłnŌłŚ (q)Žłn (q  )dqdq  .
                       n

As is well known, however, the sum over all n of Žł nŌłŚ (q)Žłn (q  ) is just
╬┤(q ŌłÆ q  ), so that what corresponds to the trace of F is Žü(q, q)dq.
We are therefore led to consider the quantity,
                
                         i                     
   TrF  = exp ŌłÆ A [qT , qm         , . . . , qŌłÆm +1 , q
                                                           T1
                                                              ]
                               2


                         i
               ├Ś exp        A [qT , qm , . . . , qŌłÆm +1 , qT ]
                                   2                        1

                                                       
               ├Ś F (. . . q1 , q0 . . .) ┬Ę gT dqT ┬Ę gT dqT
                                              2      2        1   1
                 ŌłÜ              ŌłÜ                ŌłÜ            ŌłÜ
                   g dqm ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę gdqŌłÆm +1             gdqm ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę qdqŌłÆm +1
               ├Ś                                 ┬Ę                        . (79)
                           AŌłŚ ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę AŌłŚ                       A┬ĘA
The passage to the limit of in’¼ünitely ’¼üne subdivisions is implied, as
usual. Since now there are no wave functions, and therefore nothing
special about the times T1 and T2 , we can consider the true trace to be
the limit of the TrF , de’¼üned in (79), for a sequence of mechanical
systems each of which has an action identical to the true one for
successively longer time intervals. (The problem of convergence is
ever present.)
   The trace de’¼üned in (79) is identical to the usual trace of quantum
mechanics if F is a function of one coordinate (e.g., q 0 ) only, and
the action is the time integral of a Lagrangian. It lacks, however, in
52             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


the general case, one important property, and it is this that makes
the results of this section so uncertain. The trace of an arbitrary
functional is not always a real number!
    We lack some condition on the functionals which we are to place
into (79), in order to obtain a real value, so that we can say that the
functional represents some real observable quantity, the expectation
of which is the trace. That is to say, we lack the condition on a
functional that it represent an observable, analogous to the condition
in ordinary quantum mechanics that an operator, to represent an
observable, must be Hermitian. The correct criterion is not known
to the author. The most obvious suggestions revolve around the
generalization to (79) which is obtained by letting F be a function
of the q  variables, as well as of q. A real trace is obtained if F
is any function symmetrical with respect to interchange of each q
with the corresponding q  (i.e., if F (. . . q1 , q0 , . . . ; . . . q1 , q0 , . . .) =
F (. . . q1 , q0 , . . . ; . . . q1 , q0 ). For example F might be a function of
1          
2 (qj +qj ) only. This symmetry condition may be all that is necessary
to insure that the functional correspond to a real observable. The
product, and the sum of two such symmetrical functionals is again
symmetrical.
    We pass from the general problem of a criterion for any functional
to that of trying to determine the form of certain special functionals
which we should like to identify with special observables (in partic-
ular, projection operators). Let us ’¼ürst try to ’¼ünd the F that we
are to place in (79) so that the resulting trace is the probability that
q at the time t╠ä2 (i.e., q(t╠ä2 )) has the value b if it is known that q at
the time t╠ä1 has the value a. If A is the integral of a Lagrangian the
answer is simply F = ╬┤(qt╠ä2 ŌłÆ b)╬┤(qt╠ä1 ŌłÆ a), as can be immediately
veri’¼üed. On the other hand, I have not succeeded in prove that the
trace of this quantity is in general real. The trace of,

                        '                        (        '                        (
                            qt╠ä2 + qt╠ä 2                     qt╠ä1 + qt╠ä 1
                    ╬┤                       ŌłÆb       ┬Ę╬┤                       ŌłÆa
                                 2                                 2
              The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                53


is, however, real and gives the same value to the desired probability
if the action is an integral of a Lagrangian.
    We may therefore tentatively assume that,
               '                   ( '                  (
                    qt╠ä2 + qt╠ä 2       qt╠ä1 + qt╠ä 1
            Tr ╬┤                  ŌłÆb ┬Ę╬┤               ŌłÆa    ┬Ę db
                         2                   2

gives the relative probability that, if q has the value a at the
time t╠ä1 , a measurement of q at the time t╠ä2 will lead to b, in the
range db. (The absolute probability may be gotten by dividing by
   !  qt╠ä +q      "
Tr ╬┤ 1 2 t╠ä1 ŌłÆ a ).
   We shall likewise assume that
     ' )                                  *   ( '                  (
                                                 qt╠ä1 + qt╠ä 1
           1 qt╠ä2 +╬Ą + qt╠ä2 +╬Ą qt╠ä2 + qt╠ä2
 Tr ╬┤                         ŌłÆ              ŌłÆv ┬Ę╬┤               ŌłÆa    dv
           ╬Ą         2              2                   2

gives the relative probability that, if q has the value a at the time t╠ä1 ,
a measurement of velocity at the time t╠ä2 will lead to v in the range
dv. That this gives the correct answer, in the case of a Lagrangian
action which involves the coordinate q in the kinetic energy term as
 1    2
 2 mq╠ć , is shown below.
     In a similar way we can de’¼üne the probabilities for any quantities
involving linear combinations of the coordinates (and that includes
velocities, accelerations, etc.). For example, the probability that the
di’¼Ćerence in the coordinate q at the time t╠ä3 and its value at the time
t╠ä2 is between b and b + db, when it is known that at the time t╠ä1 the
velocity plus c times the position is a, is given by the trace of,
          '                                  (
            qt╠ä2 + qt╠ä 2   qt╠ä3 + qt╠ä 3
        ╬┤                 ŌłÆ               ŌłÆb
                 2                2
                 '                                                          (
                   qt╠ä1 +╬Ą + qt╠ä 1 +╬Ą qt╠ä1 + qt╠ä 1
           ├Ś╬┤                           ŌłÆ            + c(qt╠ä1 + qt╠ä 1 ) ŌłÆ a ┬Ę db .
                           2╬Ą                2╬Ą

(This has been checked for a free harmonic oscillator). It is possible
that this is even true if t╠ä3 is before t╠ä1 , and t╠ä2 after t╠ä1 .
54             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


     We shall now show that
             ' )                              *   (  
                                          
               1 qt╠ä2 +╬Ą + qt╠ä2 +╬Ą qt╠ä2 + qt╠ä2
          Tr ╬┤                    ŌłÆ              ŌłÆv ┬ĘG ,
               ╬Ą         2              2

where G involves times earlier than t 2 does agree with the usual form
for ’¼ünding the probability of a given momentum, mv, if the action
is the integral of a Lagrangian, say 12 mq╠ć 2 ŌłÆ V (q). In the expression
(79) the integral on qT2 can be immediately performed, inasmuch as,
(see (45))

       dq                   %  qT ŌłÆqm 2             &             %  qT ŌłÆqm
                                                                               
                                                                                  2                   &
                        i╬Ą    m     2
           T                                 ŌłÆV (qT )         ŌłÆ i╬Ą     m    2               ŌłÆV (qT )
               2
                   ┬Ęe        2         ╬Ą
                                                   2       ┬Ęe         2        ╬Ą                 2
          A
                    
          = ╬┤(qm ŌłÆ qm ) ┬Ę AŌłŚ .

Thus the integral on qm  means merely replacing q  by q . We have
                                                           m     m
thus again the same expression as (79) with one term integrated
from the end. We can repeat this process many times, telescoping
the Lagrangians, until we come to the term q t2 + ╬Ą. (That is to say,
we could have taken T2 equal to t2 + ╬Ą without loss of generality).
Let us suppose also that we have integrated all variables following
qt2 and qt 2 and the net result is Žü(qt2 , qt 2 ). (It can be expressed in
this form for any G satisfying our condition in virtue of the form of
the action.) That is to say, we must calculate,

                                                      
                          1            qt2 + qt 2
                       ╬┤     qt2 +╬Ą ŌłÆ                ŌłÆV
                          ╬Ą                 2
                                 %  qt +╬Ą ŌłÆqt 2             &
                            ŌłÆ i╬Ą  m    2       2   ŌłÆV (qt2 +╬Ą )
                          ├Śe     2       ╬Ą

                                 %  qt +╬Ą ŌłÆqt 2              &
                            + i╬Ą  m    2       2   ŌłÆV (qt2 +╬Ą )
                          ├Śe     2       ╬Ą


                                                              dqt 2         dqt
                             ├Ś Žü(qt2 , qt2 ) ┬Ę dqt2 +╬Ą ┬Ę                 ┬Ę 2             .
                                                                ŌłÆ2ŽĆ╬Ąi              2ŽĆ╬Ąi
                                                                  m                  m
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics          55


The phases of the exponentials, when combined, reduce simply to
                  )                                 *
           i╬Ą m      qt2 +╬Ą ŌłÆ qt2 2     qt2 +╬Ą ŌłÆ qt 2 2
              ┬Ę                     ŌłÆ                     .
            2             ╬Ą                  ╬Ą

The integral on the ╬┤ function, over q t2 +╬Ą , requires that one substitute
                             qt +q 
for this quantity qt2 +╬Ą = 2 2 t2 + v╬Ą, and multiply by ╬Ą, to obtain,
in the ’¼ünal result,
             
                 m ŌłÆ imv qt       imv 
                     e  2 ┬Ę e+  qt2 Žü(qt2 , qt 2 )dqt2 dqt 2 .
                2ŽĆ
This agrees with the usual expression for the probability of a given
momentum p, if p = mv. (The extra factor of normalization, comes
from the fact that dp = mdv.)

10. Application to the Forced Harmonic Oscillator
As a special problem, because we shall need the results in the next
section, we consider, from the point of view of the modi’¼üed quantum
mechanics, the problem of the forced harmonic oscillator; that is, an
oscillator interacting with another system. This problem, when the
oscillator is interacting with a Lagrangian system, can of course be
handled by the usual methods of quantum mechanics. We shall see,
however, that the added power of looking at all the times at once, so
to speak, which arises in such equations as (68), has some advantages.
With a wave function, the oscillator and the interacting system are
so ’¼ürmly interlocked, mathematically, that it is hard to study the
properties of the oscillator without, at the same time, solving for the
motion of the interacting system. We shall be able here, however, to
solve that half of the problem which involves the oscillator, without
solving the entire problem.
    If x is the coordinate of our oscillator, the action is of the form,
                         
                                mx╠ć2 mŽē 2 x2
              A = A0 + dt             ŌłÆ          + ╬│(t)x ,           (80)
                                  2         2
56          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


where A0 is the action of the other particles of the system of which
the oscillator is a part, and ╬│(t) ┬Ę x is the interaction of the oscillator
with the rest of the system. Thus, if we symbolize the coordinates of
the rest of the system by Q, ╬│(t) is some functional of Q. (We might
also contemplate that the oscillator is not interacting with any other
quantum mechanical system, but is simply acted on by a forcing
potential. In this case, ╬│(t) is a simple function of t, and represents
the force acting on the oscillator at time t.) We shall suppose that
╬│(t) is zero for times outside the range 0 to T , and shall compute
matrix elements of the form ŽćT |1|Žł0 A where Žł0 is a wave function
at time t = 0, (it involves Q as well as x), and Žć T is a wave function
at time t = T . Writing this in more detail, by equation (68) it is,

                                                                    mŌłÆ1
                                            i
 ŽćT |1|Žł0 A =       ŽćT (Qm , xm ) exp       A0 [┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Qj ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ] +
                                            
                                                                      i=0

                                               
                    m xi+1 ŌłÆ xi 2 mŽē 2 x2i
                  ├Ś               ŌłÆ        + ╬│i xi ┬Ę (ti+1 ŌłÆ ti )
                    2 ti+1 ŌłÆ ti     2
                                    ŌłÜ              ŌłÜ
                                        gdQm ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę gdQ0
                  ├Ś Žł0 (Q0 , x0 )
                                          Am ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę A1

                                  dxm ┬Ę dxmŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę dx0
                  ├Ś                                                   ,   (81)
                          2ŽĆi
                           m   (t m ŌłÆ t mŌłÆ1 ) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę   2ŽĆi
                                                       m   (t 1 ŌłÆ t 0 )


where the Am are the normalizing constants appropriate to the action
A0 [Qj ], and Qi is the variable Q at time ti , xi the variable x at the
time ti , and ╬│i = ╬│(ti ), a function, perhaps, of the Qi . We are to set
tm = T and t0 = 0.
    Inasmuch as the integrand is a quadratic function of the x i (for
i = 0 or m) we may actually perform the integration over these x i ,
and leave the integrations on Qi to be performed later. We will
simplify the work by taking all the intervals, t i+1 ŌłÆ ti , equal, and
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics             57


equal to ╬Ą. We are therefore led to consider the quantity,

                                                      mŌłÆ1        
                                                      i╬Ą  m xi+1 ŌłÆ xi 2
   G╬│ (xm , x0 ; T ) = lim          ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę       exp
                         ╬ĄŌåÆ0
                        m╬ĄŌåÆT
                                                              2   ╬Ą
                                                         i=0
                                              
                          mŽē 2 x2i                   dx    ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę dx
                        ŌłÆ          + ╬│i xi           mŌłÆ1  1 .           (82)
                            2
                                                      m ┬Ę┬Ę┬Ę
                                                     2ŽĆ╬Ąi        2ŽĆ╬Ąi
                                                                   m


    We shall perform the integrations one after the other, starting
with x1 , then x2 , etc. We shall determine the result by a recursive
method. We can guess, that after the integrations from x 1 to xi ŌłÆ 1
have been performed, the integrand will depend, except for a factor
involving other xŌĆÖs, quadratically on the variable x i , according to the
following form;

                      i      2                             dxi
                 Ai e  (╬▒i xi +╬▓i xi xi+1 +╬┤i xi +╬Ęi ) ┬Ę         ,      (83)
                                                           2ŽĆ╬Ąi
                                                            m


where Ai , ╬┤i , ╬Ęi are constants, independent of xi , xi+1 , etc., which are
to be found. The integral on xi may now be performed, by writing
the exponent as,
                              
          i         ╬▓i xi+1 + ╬┤ 2 i (╬▓i xi+1 + ╬┤i )2  i
            ╬▒i xi +              ŌłÆ                   + ╬Ęi
                       2╬▒i              4╬▒i         

                                ╬▓x     +╬┤i                  i 2      ŌłÜ
changing the variable xi to xi + i i+1
                                    2╬▒i      and   using  e 
                                                              ╬│
                                                                d╬│ =   ŽĆi.
                               (╬▓i xi+1 +╬┤i )2 
We obtain ŌłÜ   A i
                    exp  ╬Ęi ŌłÆ
                         i
                                      4╬▒i        . Multiplying this by the
              2╬Ą╬▒i /m
term
                                                       
           i 2mx2i+1 mxi+1 xi+2 mŽē 2 ╬Ą 2
       exp          ŌłÆ          ŌłÆ      xi+1 + ╬Ą╬│i+1 xi+1
              2╬Ą        ╬Ą       2

giving the part of the exponential in (82) depending on x i+1 , we ’¼ünd
that after the integration on xi is performed the dependence of the
58          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


integral on xi+1 is,
       A          i 2mx2i+1 mxi+1 xi+2 mŽē 2 ╬Ą 2
      i      exp          ŌłÆ          ŌłÆ      xi+1
      2╬Ą╬▒i /m        2╬Ą        ╬Ą       2

                                ╬▓i2 x2i+1 ╬▓i ╬┤i        ╬┤2        dxi+1
        + ╬│i+1 ┬Ę ╬Ąxi+1 + ╬Ęi ŌłÆ            ŌłÆ      xi+1 ŌłÆ i        ┬Ę     .
                                  4╬▒i      2╬▒i        4╬▒i          2ŽĆ╬Ąi
                                                                    m

This is again of the form (83), so that our guess is self-consistent if
we set,
                            
                                 m
                     Ai+1 =          ┬Ę Ai ,                       (84)
                               2╬Ą╬▒i

                                m  ╬▓2   mŽē 2 ╬Ą
                       ╬▒i+1 =     ŌłÆ i ŌłÆ        ,                       (85)
                                ╬Ą  4╬▒i   2
                                    m
                       ╬▓i+1 = ŌłÆ       ,                                (86)
                                    ╬Ą
                                            2╬┤i ╬▓i
                       ╬┤i+1 = ╬Ą╬│i+1 ŌłÆ              ,                   (87)
                                             4╬▒i
                                         ╬┤i2
                       ╬Ęi+1 = ╬Ęi ŌłÆ           .                         (88)
                                        4╬▒i
    We note, therefore, ╬▓i is a constant ŌłÆ m ╬Ą . We shall solve the other
equations in the limit ╬Ą ŌåÆ 0 under the assumption (which will be
self-consistent, and is therefore correct) that ╬▒ i ŌłÆ 2╬Ą
                                                       m
                                                          , ╬┤i , ╬Ęi , Ai are
all ’¼ünite.
    Replacing (86) in (85) and setting
                                   m
                             ╬▒i =     + ╬╗i ,                            (89)
                                   2╬Ą
’¼ünd,
                           m      m2        mŽē 2 ╬Ą
                  ╬╗i+1 =     ŌłÆ 2 m      ŌłÆ        .
                           2╬Ą 4╬Ą 2╬Ą + ╬╗i     2
                                                                   2
                          1
Expanding the fraction 1+ 2╬Ą ╬╗
                               by the series 1 ŌłÆ 2╬Ą     4╬Ą 2
                                                 m ╬╗i + m2 ╬╗i and
                                m   i
                                                            2
keeping no further terms, ’¼ünd, ╬╗i+1 ŌłÆ ╬╗i = ŌłÆ 2╬Ą
                                             m ╬╗i ŌłÆ 2 ╬Ą. As ╬Ą ŌåÆ 0,
                                                2  mŽē
             The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         59


then, ╬╗i may be considered as a function of t i , so that dividing both
sides by ╬Ą, in the limit we may write,

                          d╬╗    2     mŽē 2
                             = ŌłÆ ╬╗2 ŌłÆ      .                         (90)
                          dt    m      2
This has the solution
                             mŽē
                       ╬╗=       cot Žē(t + const.) .                  (91)
                              2
Since, for small t, (e.g., t = ╬Ą), ╬▒ is m                   m
                                        ╬Ą , ╬╗ must approach 2╬Ą . This it
does if the const. is zero in (91). Therefore,
                          m      m mŽē
                    ╬▒=       +╬╗=    +   cot Žēt .                     (92)
                          2╬Ą     2╬Ą   2
                                                                     
                                         Ai
Place this in (84), yielding, Ai+1 = ŌłÜ1+╬ĄŽē        Ōł╝
                                                  = Ai  1 ŌłÆ ╬ĄŽē
                                                               cot Žēt
                                           cot Žēt            2
for small ╬Ą. In the limit then, dAdt = ŌłÆA ┬Ę 2 cot Žēt. This implies
                                              Žē
      const.                                      i
A = ŌłÜsin Žēt . Since for t of the order ╬Ą, A is  2ŽĆ╬Ąi , the constant
          mŽē                                      m
must be 2ŽĆi    so that we ’¼ünd,
                              
                                    mŽē
                         A=                 .                    (93)
                                2ŽĆi sin Žēt
   Putting our values of ╬▒ and ╬▓ into (87), ’¼ünd,
                                           m╬┤
                  ╬┤i+1 = ╬Ą╬│i+1 +       m mŽēi        ,
                                    2╬Ą 2╬Ą + 2 cot Žēt

which leads to the di’¼Ćerential equation d╬┤dt = ╬│ ŌłÆ ╬┤ ┬Ę Žē cot Žēt. This
equation has the general solution
                           t
                      1                       const.
               ╬┤=             ╬│(s) sin Žēsds +        .
                   sin Žēt 0                   sin Žēt
Since, for small values of t, of order ╬Ą, ╬┤ approaches ŌłÆ m ╬Ą x0 , constant
here is ŌłÆmŽēx0 . Therefore,
                                        t
                      mŽēx0          1
               ╬┤=ŌłÆ            +            ╬│(s) sin Žēsds .            (94)
                      sin Žēt     sin Žēt 0
60             FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


                                   m
Replacing ╬▒ by its leading term, 2╬Ą  , in Eq. (89) we obtain, in the
                     d╬Ę     ╬┤2
limit, the equation, dt = ŌłÆ 2m . Thus, we ’¼ünd,
                                            t
                                                   [╬┤(t)]2
                                  ╬Ę=ŌłÆ                      dt             (95)
                                                     2m

and is subject to the condition that as t ŌåÆ ╬Ą, ╬Ę ŌåÆ 2╬Ą   m 2
                                                         x0 . We may
now utilize these results to compute G╬│ (xm , x0 ; T ).
   Since it is clear from its mode of formation that,
                     i    m   2      xm xm+1
                    e  ( 2╬Ą xm ŌłÆm       ╬Ą
                                             )
                                                 G╬│ (xm , x0 ; T )
                                      i     2
                          = Am e  (╬▒m xm +╬▓m xm xm+1 +╬┤m xm +╬Ęm )

we may calculate G in the limit as ╬Ą ŌåÆ 0, m╬Ą ŌåÆ T , from our ex-
pressions (92), (86), (94), (95) and (93). After a little algebraical
rearrangement, it may be written in the rather convenient form (we
have replaced xm by x, and x0 by x ),

                                                              i
     G╬│ (x, x ; T ) = G0 (x ŌłÆ a, x ŌłÆ b; T ) ┬Ę exp
                                                            2mŽē
               T t
         ├Ś                ╬│(s)╬│(t) sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)dsdt + m2 Žē 2 sin ŽēT ┬Ę a ┬Ę b ,
                0     0

                                                                          (96)

where
                                                  T
                                 1
                          a=                           ╬│(t) cos Žētdt      (97)
                             mŽē sin ŽēT             0

and
                                           T
                           1
                    b=                            ╬│(t) cos Žē(T ŌłÆ t)dt     (98)
                       mŽē sin ŽēT            0

and G0 (y, y  ; T ) is the value to which G╬│ (y, y  ; T ) reduces when ╬│ =
0, and is the well known generating function for the unperturbed
                The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics             61


harmonic oscillator;
                                   
                                         mŽē             mŽēi
                G0 (y, y ; T ) =                   exp
                                       2ŽĆi sin Žēt     2 sin ŽēT
                                   ├Ś {(y 2 + (y  )2 ) cos ŽēT ŌłÆ 2yy  } .    (99)

   Going back to equation (81), we may now express the average in
question by the simpli’¼üed expression,
               
                                 i
 ŽćT |1|Žł0 A = ŽćT (Qm , x)e  A0 [...Qi ...]
                                                      ŌłÜ            ŌłÜ
                                                        gdQm ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę gdQ0
                ├Ś G╬│ (x, x ; T )Žł0 (Q0 , x )dxdx ┬Ę                   .
                                                          Am ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę A1
                                                                            (100)

We shall need this formula in the next section. It is the analogue, in
a sense, of the solution (26), (27), (28) of the equations of motion for
the oscillator, in the classical case. Here, as there, the solution for
the motion of the oscillator is expressed in terms of the interacting
system, without it actually being necessary to solve for the motion
of this interacting system.

11. Particles Interacting through an Intermediate
    Oscillator
The problem which we discuss in this section is the quantum ana-
logue of the problem discussed in Section 4 of the ’¼ürst part of the
paper. Given two atoms A and B, each of which interacts with an
oscillator O, to which extent can the motion of the oscillator be dis-
regarded and the atoms be considered as interacting directly? This
problem has been solved in a special case by Fermi 15 who has shown
that the oscillators of the electromagnetic ’¼üeld which represent lon-
gitudinal waves could be eliminated from the Hamiltonian, provided
an additional term be added representing instantaneous Coulomb

15   E. Fermi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 4, (1932), p. 131.
62          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


interactions between the particles. Our problem is analogous to his
except that in the general case, as we can see from the classical ana-
logue, we shall expect that the interactions will not be instantaneous,
and hence not expressible in Hamiltonian form.
    Drawing on the classical analogue we shall expect that the sys-
tem with the oscillator is not equivalent to the system without the
oscillator for all possible motions of the oscillator, but only for those
for which some property (e.g., the initial and ’¼ünal position) of the
oscillator is ’¼üxed. These properties, in the cases discussed, are not
properties of the system at just one time, so we will not expect to
’¼ünd the equivalence simply by specifying the state of the oscillator
at a certain time, by means of a particular wave function. It is for
this reason that the ordinary methods of quantum mechanics do not
su’¼āce to solve this problem.
    The natural question to ask, working from analogy with the clas-
sical system, is: ŌĆ£What is the expected value of F , a functional in-
volving the particles only, if it is known that at time 0, the position of
the oscillator was x(0) = ╬▒, and that at the time T it was x(T ) = ╬▓?ŌĆØ
If we can show that the answer to this question is, with a given ’¼üxed
╬▒ and ╬▓, the same as the expectation of F calculated by a formula of
exactly the form (79) for an action principle involving the particles
alone, then we shall have found the conditions under which a direct
interaction can be represented as acting through an intermediate
oscillator.
    That is, we should like to satisfy, (see p. 53’¼Ć),
                                                   
                      xT + xT            x0 + x0
         Tr F ┬Ę ╬┤               ŌłÆ╬▓ ┬Ę╬┤              ŌłÆ╬▒
                          2                   2            A, B, & O

               = const. ┬Ę TrF A,B ,                               (101)

where the trace on the left is computed for the action of the particles
and the oscillator, and that on the right only involves the particles.
(The constant appears because we are interested only in relative
expectations, and can normalize the trace later.)
                 The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics                      63


    We shall simplify matters by supposing the particles are repre-
 sented by a set of coordinates, which we symbolize by Q, that the
 action for the particles is A0 , that the oscillator has the coordinate
 x(t), with the Lagrangian m  2 x╠ć ŌłÆ 2 Žē x , and that the Lagrangian of
                                  2  m 2 2

 the interaction is ╬│(t)x(t) where ╬│(t) is some functional of Q(t). Let
 the action for the particles with the oscillator eliminated be A 0 + I ,
 where I , a functional of Q only, the action of interaction, is to be
 found to satisfy (101).
    If (101) is to be satis’¼üed for all arbitrary functionals, F , we must
 have, on account of (79),
                T                 T                  
         i                              m 2
    exp A0 +          ╬│(t)x(t)dt +         (x╠ć ŌłÆ Žē x )dt
                                                    2 2
                   0                0   2
                      T                 T                   
             i                             m 2      2 2
    ├Ś exp ŌłÆ A0 +          ╬│ (t)x (t)dt +         (x╠ć ŌłÆ Žē x )dt
                      0                   0   2
                                      
         xT + xT           x0 + x0
    ├Ś╬┤              ŌłÆ╬▓ ╬┤             ŌłÆ ╬▒ dxT dx0
             2                 2
    dx ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę dx dx ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę dx
    ├Ś           ┬Ę
     A ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę A AŌłŚ ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę AŌłŚ
         
                  i                    i
= const. exp [A0 + I ] ┬Ę exp ŌłÆ [A0 + I  ]
                                      
                                       
       xT + xT              x0 + x0             dx ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę dx dx ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę dx
 ├Ś╬┤                 ŌłÆ╬▓ ╬┤               ŌłÆ ╬▒ dxT dx0                           ,
              2                  2                      A ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę AŌłŚ ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę
                                                                           (102)

 where A0 , ╬│  , and I  are the same functionals but of a di’¼Ćerent
 variable (namely, Q ) than A , ╬│, and I , and the integrations over
 the xŌĆÖs are to be performed as prescribed in detail in (79). 16 We
                        i      
 can divide out the e  (A0 ŌłÆA0 ) from each side, of course. Our main
 problem is to show that the left side, when integrated over all the
 coordinates of the oscillator, can be expressed as a product of an
 exponential function of Q only with an exponential of minus the

 16 EditorŌĆÖs note: The right-hand side of (102) is missing in the original typescript of the

 thesis. Its form has been inferred by the editor from the surrounding text.
64            FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


same function of Q only. This will be by no means generally true,
and is a consequence of our special choice of ╬┤ functions on the left
of (102).
    Since as far as the variables x are concerned, the action is La-
grangian, the integration over all x and x  from xT2 to xT can be
immediately performed in the way indicated at the end of Section 9
(see page 55). In a like manner the integrations from x T1 to x0 may
be performed. The integrations on the x-primes from x 0+╬Ą to xT ŌłÆ╬Ą
can next be performed according to the method of the last section,
and they yield GŌłŚ╬│  (xT , x0 ; T ). Those on the corresponding interme-
diate xŌĆÖs result in G╬│ (xT , x0 ; T ). Thus we must prove that,
      
          ╬┤(xT ŌłÆ ╬▓)╬┤(x0 ŌłÆ ╬▒)GŌłŚ╬│  (xT , x0 ; T )G╬│ (xT , x0 ; T )dxT dx0
                           i      i
              = const. eŌłÆ  I e  I .                               (103)

   The left side is simply G╬│  (╬▓, ╬▒; T )G╬│ (╬▓, ╬▒; T ), and by substitut-
ing ╬▓, ╬▒ in the formulas (96)ŌĆō(99) we can ’¼ünd that this left side is of
the form of the right side, if we take const. = 2ŽĆmŽē  sin ŽēT and I equal
to
           mŽē cot ŽēT                            mŽē
     I =             [(╬▓ ŌłÆ b)2 + (╬▒ ŌłÆ a)2 ] ŌłÆ        (╬▓ ŌłÆ b)(╬▒ ŌłÆ a)
               2                              sin ŽēT
                    T t
               1                                       mŽē
           +              ╬│(t)╬│(s) sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)dtds +      sin ŽēT ┬Ę ab
             2mŽē 0 0                                    2
with a and b as in (97) and (98). I  is then the corresponding thing
with ╬│  replacing ╬│ everywhere. After a little rearranging, we get
             T
                 ╬▒ sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t) + ╬▓ sin Žēt
     I =                                   ╬│(t)dt
             0            sin ŽēT
                            T t
                     1
            ŌłÆ                      sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t) sin Žēs╬│(s)╬│(t)dsdt
               mŽē sin ŽēT 0 0
                  mŽē cot ŽēT 2            mŽē
              +            [╬▓ + ╬▒2 ] ŌłÆ        ╬▓╬▒ .                  (104)
                      2                sin ŽēT
This is identical to the expression (35) obtained for the action in the
corresponding classical problem in which the initial value of x is held
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         65


at x(0) = ╬▒, and the ’¼ünal value of x(T ) = ╬▓. The added constant
term has, of course, no signi’¼ücance. (It will cancel a corresponding
term in I  .)
    Thus, the particles with the action of interaction I , may be re-
placed by a system with an intermediate oscillator, provided that,
in calculating the expectation of any functional of the particles, it is
calculated under the conditions that the oscillatorŌĆÖs initial position
is known to be ╬▒ and its ’¼ünal position is known to be ╬▓. It is to
be noted that we have not proved that, in general, the system with
the oscillator is equivalent to one without, for that is not true. The
equivalence only holds if the oscillator is known to satisfy certain
condition.
    For the other example, (28), of conditions leading to an action
principle, which we have considered in the classical case, we are led,
here, to ask the question: ŌĆ£What is the expected value of F if it is
known that for the oscillator,
                                                        
               1                                 sin ŽēT
                   x(0) + x(T ) cos ŽēT ŌłÆ x╠ć(T )            = R0
               2                                    Žē
             %                                     &
and that, 12 x(T ) + x(0) cos ŽēT + x╠ć(0) sinŽēŽēT = RT ?ŌĆØ
    To answer this question we must try to satisfy an equation anal-
                               x +x         x +x       
ogous to (102) but with ╬┤ T 2 T ŌłÆ ╬▓ ┬Ę ╬┤ 0 2 0 ŌłÆ ╬▒ replaced by,
            
              1
          ╬┤       x0 + x0 + (xT + xT ) cos ŽēT
              4
                                                                  
                     (xT +╬Ą + xT +╬Ą ) ŌłÆ (xT + xT )
                  ŌłÆ                                  sin ŽēT ŌłÆ R0
                                   ╬ĄŽē
              
                1
          ├Ś╬┤        xT + xT + (x0 + x0 ) cos ŽēT
                4
                                                                
                     (x0 + x0 ) ŌłÆ (xŌłÆ╬Ą + xŌłÆ╬Ą )
                  +                              sin ŽēT ŌłÆ RT .      (105)
                                  ╬ĄŽē
   In this case the integrations on x and x  can only be performed
from xT2 to xT +╬Ą , leaving an extra Lagrangian factor, and those from
xT1 can proceed only to xŌłÆ╬Ą . The integrations between x0 and xT
66                 FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


can be performed as before, giving G functions. The result is that
we must ’¼ünd an I to satisfy:
                 %          2               &
                 i╬Ą m xT +╬Ą ŌłÆxT
                                   ŌłÆ mŽē
                                        2
                                          x2T +╬Ą      dx
     dxT +╬Ą ┬Ę eŌłÆ  2      ╬Ą           2            ┬Ę  T ┬Ę GŌłŚ╬│  (xT , x0 ; T )
                                                                                        2ŽĆi╬Ą
                                                                                         ŌłÆm
                                %  x ŌłÆx             2                  &        
       dx               ŌłÆ i╬Ą     m      0       ŌłÆ╬Ą
                                                           ŌłÆ mŽē
                                                                2
                                                                (x0 )2                1
     ┬Ę 0          ┬Ęe            2          ╬Ą                2               ┬Ę╬┤         x0 + x0 + (xT + xT )
         2ŽĆi╬Ą                                                                         4
          ŌłÆm
                                                                                                    
                2xT +╬Ą ŌłÆ (xT + xT )                                                                     1
     ├Ś cos ŽēT ŌłÆ                      sin ŽēT                                        ŌłÆ R0         ┬Ę╬┤          xT + xT
                        ╬ĄŽē                                                                               4
                                                                                                          
                               (x0 + x0 ) ŌłÆ 2xŌłÆ╬Ą
     + (x0 + x0 ) cos ŽēT +                       sin ŽēT ŌłÆ RT
                                        ╬ĄŽē
          %           2      2 2
                                      &
        i╬Ą m xT +╬Ą ŌłÆxT                   dx                        dx
                          ŌłÆ mŽē
     ┬Ęe   2     ╬Ą           2
                                xT +╬Ą
                                         T ┬Ę G╬│ (xT , x0 ; T ) ┬Ę  0
                                                                2ŽĆi╬Ą                                       2ŽĆi╬Ą
                                                                 m                                           m
              %  x ŌłÆx            2         2
                                                  &
         i╬Ą    m     0       ŌłÆ╬Ą
                                       ŌłÆ mŽē x20                                            i        i
     ┬Ę e+     2         ╬Ą                2            ┬Ę dxŌłÆ╬Ą        = const. eŌłÆ  I e  I .                        (106)

   Since the integration of this complicated expression is perfectly
straightforward, we shall not include it here. (It is best to integrate
                                                                                                i╬Ą Žē 2     2   i╬Ą Žē 2   2
with respect to dxT +╬Ą and dxŌłÆ╬Ą ’¼ürst. The term e+  2 (x0 ) eŌłÆ  2 x0
can be neglected because it is of no importance in the limit as ╬Ą ŌåÆ 0.)
The result is that the left side may be made equal to the right side
                               sin ŽēT and taking I to be
by choosing the constant as 2ŽĆmŽē
                  T
                     R0 sin Žē(T ŌłÆ t) + RT sin Žēt
           I =                                       ╬│(t)dt
                  0               sin ŽēT
                           T t
                      1
                 +                  sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)╬│(t)╬│(s)dtds ,    (107)
                    2mŽē 0 0
with a similar expression for I  , obtained by replacing ╬│ by ╬│  . This
is again in agreement with the classical result.
    To answer the question: ŌĆ£What is the expectation of F if it is
known that initially the position of the oscillator is w, and its velocity
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics         67


is v?ŌĆØ, we must try to satisfy an equation analogous to (102), but
        X +x      X +x      
with ╬┤ T 2 T ŌłÆ ╬▓ ┬Ę ╬┤ 0 2 0 ŌłÆ ╬▒ replaced by
                                              
            x0 + x0       x0 + x0 xŌłÆ╬Ą + xŌłÆ╬Ą
          ╬┤          ŌłÆw ┬Ę╬┤         ŌłÆ           ŌłÆv .
               2              2╬Ą        2╬Ą

If this is done, however, and the integrations are carried out, the left
side of (102) becomes
                    T
     m        i
        exp             2(╬│(t) ŌłÆ ╬│  (t))(mv sin Žēt + Žēw cos Žēt)dt
    2ŽĆ     2mŽē     0
           T t
        +        (╬│(t) ŌłÆ ╬│  (t))(╬│(s) + ╬│  (s)) sin Žē(t ŌłÆ s)dt . (108)
               0   0

It is seen that (102) cannot be satis’¼üed by any choice of I , and
there now appear in the exponential (108) cross terms between ╬│
and ╬│  , such as ╬│(t)╬│  (s). This corresponds to the classical ’¼ünding,
that no action exists in case the initial position and velocity are held
constant.
    These results serve as a con’¼ürmation of our formal generalization
to systems without a Hamiltonian. They have obvious application
to electrodynamics into which we will, however, not go here.
    We should like to make a remark, before closing this section, about
equation (108). Even though it does not lead to a system which
can be expressed by a quantum mechanical least action principle,
it is nevertheless correct, of course, that to ’¼ünd the average of the
functional F we must multiply F by the expression (108) times
exp i (A0 ŌłÆ A0 ) and integrate over all the Q and Q . That is to
say, the expected value of F for this system is obtained in a way
analogous to (79), except that the phase of the exponential, which in
(79) is of the form i {A [Q] ŌłÆ A [Q ]} is now of the form i B(Q, Q ),
where the quantity B involves the expression in (108).
    What should be the behaviour of the system, described in this
way, in the classical limit as  ŌåÆ 0? DiracŌĆÖs argument (see page 27)
in this case leads to the conclusion that only those values of Q, and
68          FeynmanŌĆÖs Thesis ŌĆö A New Approach to Quantum Theory


of Q , will be of importance which satisfy both,
               ╬┤B(Q, Q )               ╬┤B(Q, Q )
                          =0     and               = 0.
                 ╬┤Q(t)                   ╬┤Q (t)
   Inasmuch as B(Q, Q ) = ŌłÆB(Q , Q), the second of these equa-
tions results from the ’¼ürst by interchange of the Q and Q  . There-
fore one solution of these equations would have the property that
Q(t) = Q (t) where Q(t) satis’¼ües,
                                  
                      ╬┤B(Q, Q ) 
                                           = 0.                (109)
                        ╬┤Q(t) Q (t)=Q(t)

   With B as given by (108), this leads immediately to the classical
equation got by substituting for x(t) from (26) in (24), and replacing
x(0) by w, and x╠ć(0) by v. This suggests a way of quantizing systems
which classically do not satisfy a simple principle of least action, but
we shall not investigate this here.

12. Conclusion
We have presented, in the foregoing pages, a generalization of quan-
tum mechanics applicable to a system whose classical analogue is de-
scribed by a principle of least action. It is important to emphasize,
however, some of the di’¼āculties and limitations of the description
presented here.
    One of the most important limitations has already been discussed.
The interpretation of the formulas from the physical point of view
is rather unsatisfactory. The interpretation in terms of the concept
of transition probability requires our altering the mechanical system,
and our speaking of states of the system at times very far from the
present. The interpretation in terms of expectations, which avoids
this di’¼āculty, is incomplete, since the criterion that a functional
represent a real physical observable is lacking. It is possible that an
analysis of the theory of measurements is required here. A concept
such as the ŌĆ£reduction of the wave packetŌĆØ is not directly applicable,
for in the mathematics we must describe the system for all times,
            The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics        69


and if a measurement is going to be made in the interval of interest,
this fact must be put somehow into the equations from the start.
Summarizing: a physical interpretation should be sought which does
not refer to the behaviour of the system at times very far distant
from a present time of interest.
    A point of vagueness is the normalization factor, A. No rule
has been given to determine it for a given action expression. This
question is related to the di’¼ācult mathematical question as to the
conditions under which the limiting process of subdividing the time
scale, required by equations such as (68), actually converges.
    The problem of the form that relativistic quantum mechanics, and
the Dirac equation, take from this point of view remains unsolved.
Attempts to substitute, for the action, the classical relativistic form
(integral of proper time) have met with di’¼āculties associated with
the fact that the square root involved becomes imaginary for certain
values of the coordinates over which the action is integrated.
    The ’¼ünal test of any physical theory lies, of course, in experiment.
No comparison to experiment has been made in the paper. The
author hopes to apply these methods to quantum electrodynamics.
It is only out of some such direct application that an experimental
comparison can be made.
    The author would like to express his gratitude to Professor John
A. Wheeler for his continued advice and encouragement.
This page intentionally left blank
